[Unknown]: IVM
[Amit Varma]: We want tales of lust and carnage, greed and conquest, love and madness.
[Amit Varma]: We want romance and betrayal and violence and murder.
[Amit Varma]: And frankly history is full of all of this.
[Amit Varma]: Our present times are relatively sane.
[Amit Varma]: The stories that should fill our history books make all the most colourful story books seem so tame by comparison.
[Amit Varma]: I read a book recently that had people getting trampled by mad elephants,
[Amit Varma]: that had a father trying to burn his son in his bedroom,
[Amit Varma]: but instead getting killed by his son in his shower.
[Amit Varma]: We had a sultan behead his assassin and carry his head around on a horse,
[Amit Varma]: while kingdoms went to war because a ruler developed a crush on a girl
[Amit Varma]: and decided he had to abduct her and have her in his harem.
[Amit Varma]: It's a mad story book and it makes the Game of Thrones look like a children's book.
[Amit Varma]: It's a book you won't put down when you start reading it,
[Amit Varma]: especially if you're reading it on your smartphone,
[Amit Varma]: because hey, who puts down their smartphones these days?
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen,
[Unknown]: our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioural science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Bhadwa.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Today's subject is the history of the Deccan.
[Amit Varma]: Now for most people the Deccan is all about Shivaji versus the Mughals,
[Amit Varma]: but actually the Deccan has an incredibly colourful history
[Amit Varma]: and the book I referred to a few moments ago is
[Amit Varma]: Rebel Sultans by the young historian Manu Pillay.
[Amit Varma]: Manu is only 28 years old and has already written two books,
[Amit Varma]: The Ivory Throne and Rebel Sultans,
[Amit Varma]: and his writing is exactly what good history should be.
[Amit Varma]: Lucid, easy to read, witty and very, very entertaining.
[Amit Varma]: This is clearly a man in love with his subject.
[Amit Varma]: And why would he not be?
[Amit Varma]: He committed his first homicide at the age of 13.
[Amit Varma]: This is something he casually revealed to me in a conversation before we recorded the podcast
[Amit Varma]: and since it was confidential, I shall say no more on it.
[Amit Varma]: But do ask him about it if you run into him.
[Amit Varma]: And now for our conversation, but before we get to that, let's take a quick emotional break.
[Amit Varma]: Like me, are you someone who loves fine art,
[Amit Varma]: but can't really afford to have paintings by the artists you like hanging on your walls?
[Amit Varma]: Well, worry no more. Head on over to IndianColours.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colours is a company that licenses images of the finest modern art from some of the best artists in India
[Amit Varma]: and adapts them into objects of everyday use.
[Amit Varma]: These include wearable art like stoles and shrugs,
[Amit Varma]: home decor like cushion covers and table runners,
[Amit Varma]: and accessories like tote bags.
[Amit Varma]: This allows art lovers to actually get fine art into their homes at an accessible price,
[Amit Varma]: and artists get royalties on sales, just like authors do.
[Amit Varma]: What's more, Indian Colours now has an exciting range of new products,
[Amit Varma]: including fridge magnets with some stunning motifs,
[Amit Varma]: and salad bowls and platters made of mango wood.
[Amit Varma]: Their artists include luminaries like Babu Xavier, Vasvo x Vasvo, Brinda Miller, Dilip Sharma, Shruti Nelson, and Pradeep Mishra.
[Amit Varma]: They accept bulk orders for corporate and festival gifting,
[Amit Varma]: but even if you want to buy just for yourself or a friend,
[Amit Varma]: head on over to IndianColours.com.
[Amit Varma]: That's Colours with an O-U.
[Amit Varma]: And if you want a 20% discount, apply the code IVM20.
[Amit Varma]: That's I-V-M for IVM Podcast.
[Amit Varma]: IVM20 for a 20% discount at IndianColours.com.
[Guest]: Manu, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you for having me. I've been hearing for a few months now, but it's good to be on the program finally.
[Amit Varma]: Great to hear.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm very curious about how you became a historian.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, first of all, you're like 28 years old, and you've already written two acclaimed books of history.
[Amit Varma]: So how did you sort of get drawn towards writing history?
[Guest]: Well, it began with stories, because more than history as such, it was the stories in my own family.
[Guest]: Because every now and then, you know, I grew up in Pune, but we would go to Kerala to my grandmother's place.
[Guest]: And she would tell these vivid, reverting stories about her own family members.
[Guest]: And she had this fascinating way of telling stories without any censorship.
[Guest]: Because normally you have this image of your grandmother as somebody who tells you stories with, you know, moral lessons at the end of it.
[Guest]: My grandmother told me no such story.
[Guest]: She told me about her uncles and how many illegitimate children they had,
[Guest]: how many wives they married, how they discarded their wives, how the system there worked, you know,
[Guest]: how when she was growing up, what the agrarian economy was.
[Guest]: These were the things I grew up listening to.
[Guest]: So it was a story of groves and gods and fighting goddesses and, you know,
[Guest]: a great-great-great grandmother who could tame an elephant and things like that.
[Guest]: So I started getting interested in these people.
[Guest]: And, you know, I refer to this uncle with illegitimate kids, for example.
[Guest]: The idea was that she'd say it in such hilarious ways, these stories.
[Guest]: I realized very quickly that although these people were not of my time,
[Guest]: their context was different, their period was different completely,
[Guest]: they were not like us human beings.
[Guest]: They were made of flesh and blood.
[Guest]: They had the same instincts and impulses.
[Guest]: And that to me was fascinating, the idea that they may have lived 150 years before me,
[Guest]: but they were just like me in terms of what they were trying to do, you know, who they were as people.
[Guest]: And once you start seeing history through the eyes of the people who make history,
[Guest]: then you start realizing that it's easier to connect with history.
[Guest]: So then for me, the journey then moved to biographies of people.
[Guest]: I started reading about people in history.
[Guest]: And then, of course, when I was about 18, I came across this long-forgotten Malayali queen,
[Guest]: the Setulakshmi Bai of Travancore.
[Guest]: And the story was so fascinating for me that, you know,
[Guest]: it launched something that lasted six years.
[Guest]: And from 19 to 25, I was working on my first book, which came out in 2015,
[Guest]: The Ivory Throne.
[Guest]: And, you know, then, of course, I came to the Deccan, which was launched earlier this year.
[Amit Varma]: So I remember when I was 19, back in the day, pretty much the only thing I knew was how to mix Old Monk and Coke.
[Amit Varma]: How do you know how to do history?
[Amit Varma]: How do you learn that?
[Guest]: What is doing history?
[Guest]: Doing history, I suppose there's no single answer to doing history.
[Guest]: Of course, it's a science in a way, it needs a certain amount of responsibility.
[Guest]: But I didn't go into it thinking, oh, I'm going to write this book this way or whatever.
[Guest]: That evolved over time.
[Guest]: At 19, you know, I suppose when I went in, I was looking for this fascinating story.
[Guest]: I was collecting material.
[Guest]: I did a skeletal draft.
[Guest]: But I didn't know what the hell I was actually doing.
[Guest]: But then, luckily for me, because I invested the time in it, which was six years, I grew as a person.
[Guest]: It wasn't the 19-year-old who went into the book, who finished the book in 2015.
[Guest]: You know, I had changed as a person.
[Guest]: The book changed me just as much as I ended up writing the book.
[Guest]: And in that process, I did a master's degree at the time, which I had to do a thesis.
[Guest]: So at university, we were taught about research methods, you know, how to do your footnoting, how to find material, things like that.
[Guest]: Although that was in international relations, the point was those skills, so to speak, ended up, you know, being perfectly applicable to history as well.
[Guest]: And I started figuring out how to access archives, how to go about getting your material.
[Guest]: And then, naturally, things started falling into place.
[Guest]: So you have a combination of your material, your story, as well as, you know, everything that needs to finally come together and create that recipe for it to work.
[Guest]: So, you know, I put together three or four or five drafts, actually.
[Guest]: Some parts of the book are five drafts.
[Guest]: And the interesting thing is the final draft, the final version of the book, was entirely trying to read it from the perspective of the reader.
[Guest]: In the sense that for the first three or four drafts, I was writing what I wanted to say.
[Guest]: It was the story I wanted to tell.
[Guest]: But the final version, before it went to press, for six months, was trying to figure out how is the reader going to read this.
[Guest]: That's where the difference is, right?
[Guest]: So you have academic historians who populate the seminar circuit.
[Guest]: But I didn't want to do that because I found there are these fascinating stories.
[Guest]: They need to be conveyed to a larger audience.
[Guest]: You have to have a bridge that takes solidly researched history, but in an accessible fashion to as large an audience as possible.
[Guest]: So then you need to know what the audience is thinking.
[Guest]: You need to figure out what appeals to them.
[Guest]: Your language has to have a certain elegance.
[Guest]: So for me, doing history is academic rigor in terms of how you approach your material, how you interrogate your material, and how you draw your conclusions.
[Guest]: But also writing in a fashion that is literary, that is attractive, that tries and reaches out to as many people as possible.
[Guest]: Because this is, frankly, everybody's heritage.
[Guest]: If the stories could fascinate me in my teens, someone needs to sort of disseminate them for a larger audience.
[Guest]: And doing that means your style of writing also matters.
[Amit Varma]: And you, of course, talking about your book, Ivory Throne, which I'd encourage all my listeners to check out.
[Amit Varma]: And what was sort of the early books which gave you a sense that history is not a boring subject,
[Amit Varma]: but it can, you know, be told in as fascinating and gripping and engrossing a manner as a novel or a storybook?
[Guest]: You know, funnily enough, it wasn't so much history books that influenced the writing itself,
[Guest]: which was, for example, P. G. Woodhouse, I keep saying that, you know, there's a certain irreverence that I picked up from there,
[Guest]: which you may have found in Rebel Sultan, as well as my book on the Deccan,
[Guest]: which is that every now and then, I mean, the whole idea is to say that although this is history, although this is serious business,
[Guest]: never take yourself or your writing, or even frankly, any of these people too seriously.
[Guest]: Because it wasn't like they woke up in the morning and decided, oh, we're making history today.
[Guest]: No, they were just going about their lives.
[Guest]: So we realized that we're able to look at history from a different perspective in a different way
[Guest]: without getting completely overawed by what is happening.
[Guest]: But otherwise, in terms of writing history in an accessible way, William Dalrymple gets great credit.
[Guest]: Because frankly, for me, in my early teens, his books were the ones that really, you know, stood out and told me that,
[Guest]: hold on, this is history, it's archival material, but it's sold so well.
[Guest]: It's told so richly that you feel an inducement to turn the page, you want to turn the page.
[Guest]: And that is what I wanted to do as well.
[Guest]: Just as the stories I heard in my family, you know, could make me sit up with pleasure and delight.
[Guest]: This was, I was reading a book that was making me do the same thing.
[Guest]: And I thought, you know, those are the kind of books that I want to do.
[Guest]: So partly it was fiction more than nonfiction.
[Guest]: Your P.G. Woodhouse of the world, Aubrey Menon and his Ramayana retold.
[Guest]: It's a satirical take on the Ramayana. It was one of the earliest books to be banned in India.
[Guest]: But it's fascinating to look at how one man could take this grand epic and give it this very interesting twist.
[Guest]: And, of course, then finally Dalrymple and, you know, all the other writers who were writing at that time.
[Amit Varma]: And before we start talking about the rebel sultans, which, by the way, I found, you know,
[Amit Varma]: something you wouldn't expect from a book of history is full of LOL moments, not just in the events you describe,
[Amit Varma]: but also the way you write them, as you said.
[Amit Varma]: But before we get to that, you also mentioned that the process of writing The Ivory Throne changed you as a person.
[Amit Varma]: In what ways did it change you or the way you look at the world?
[Guest]: Well, if you looked at The Ivory Throne, it's a 700-page book.
[Guest]: So, I mean, I didn't realize it was going to be such a long book, but obviously, you know, it proved to be a fairly long book.
[Guest]: But, you know, going in at 19 meant that I wasn't an introverted person who was used to sitting at a desk and plodding away for hours every day.
[Guest]: So, but once the story sort of, you know, hooked me, it took a life of its own and then everything became about that.
[Guest]: So I had in 2009 access to all my protagonist's personal letters and so on.
[Guest]: But then I realized the other piece in the puzzle was in the British archives in London.
[Guest]: So I wanted to go there.
[Guest]: How do you convince your parents at 19 or 20 that you want to go abroad and write a book?
[Guest]: So obviously I said, oh, I want to do a master's degree. Will you fund it?
[Guest]: Of course, you know, parents being good parents, they said, of course, we'll fund it.
[Guest]: You know, there you go.
[Guest]: So then I chose a university where the workload would be lower.
[Guest]: So all the rest of my time I had access to the library.
[Guest]: So my routine was normally classes in the morning and then rush off to the archive and sit there till whenever they shut,
[Guest]: which was normally five o'clock the archive shuts and then the rest of the library at eight o'clock,
[Guest]: which meant that from the age of 20, I was stuck, you know, from classes and then sitting in a room full of quiet people for about six, seven hours a day
[Guest]: and then coming home and then doing my business.
[Guest]: So, so much so my friends started calling me the monk because I wouldn't go out.
[Guest]: I wouldn't go out drinking.
[Guest]: If I drank on a Friday, then, you know, you'd end up sleeping in late on Saturdays, where Saturday is the library shut early.
[Guest]: So I couldn't waste time there.
[Guest]: So it took a toll in terms of my personal life, what is happening in my social life.
[Guest]: But all the same, you know, I have no regrets as such.
[Guest]: Work, of course, you know, I graduated, came to Delhi, started working in Parliament with Shashi Tharoor.
[Guest]: That took its own toll.
[Guest]: So then from nine to nine, I was working on his job, you know, running his parliamentary office in Delhi.
[Guest]: And then about 10 o'clock to three was my writing time.
[Guest]: So I got into this routine of sleeping four hours a night.
[Guest]: And strangely enough, after all these years, I haven't been able to shake it off.
[Guest]: I still can't sleep well.
[Guest]: Even if I go to bed at 11, I stay there with my eyes open.
[Guest]: So in many ways, you know, the process of writing a book and being attached to that project for six years,
[Guest]: meant that everything came to, everything depended on what the project needed at any given time.
[Guest]: So where I was, so when I needed the National Archives in Delhi, I came and worked in Delhi.
[Guest]: When I wanted the British Archives, again, I went back to London and started working there.
[Guest]: Finally, it was in 2014, I realized it's been five years since I've been doing this.
[Guest]: I can't allow this to go on indefinitely, because it's taking over my life.
[Guest]: So one way or the other, before I'm 25, the book has to be done.
[Guest]: So that's when I finally shut the project and, you know, got on with the task of publishing it.
[Amit Varma]: And from there, how did you move on to the Deccan as a subject?
[Guest]: The Deccan came, so the ivory throne relates to my Malayali heritage.
[Guest]: As somebody, as a Malayali who grew up outside Kerala,
[Guest]: I was always interested in the story of my ancestors and the past in Kerala.
[Guest]: But I grew up in Pune.
[Guest]: So, you know, I grew up in the heart of the Deccan in that sense.
[Guest]: Shivaji was this towering figure in all my school textbooks.
[Guest]: But the interesting thing is that great historians have done great books on Shivaji.
[Guest]: He's a figure that has been given a great deal of historical attention.
[Guest]: But I noticed that every now and then there'd be these other characters looming behind him.
[Guest]: And you got these cameos and occasional peep shows into their lives.
[Guest]: But they were largely footnoted.
[Guest]: So every now and then Adil Shah of Bijapur or Nizam Shah of Ahmednagar would pop up.
[Guest]: But you never really understood who these people were.
[Guest]: Because they were merely secondary characters in the story of Shivaji.
[Guest]: So at some level I kept wondering who were these people.
[Guest]: Because they're not Mughals. They're not South Indian.
[Guest]: They're Shivaji's people or the people who set the stage for Shivaji to arrive.
[Guest]: But what about their story?
[Guest]: So finally, you know, I kept collecting these stories in a sort of ad-hoc, non-committal fashion.
[Guest]: But finally in 2016 when I was in Golconda in Hyderabad,
[Guest]: I went to the Golconda fort and went and looked at the Qutub Shahi tombs there.
[Guest]: And I was fascinated because beautiful structures, a very impressive fort.
[Guest]: And strangely enough, you know, nobody seemed to know very much about it.
[Guest]: Other than the tour guides there and a not very impressive trickle of tourists.
[Guest]: I was like, why aren't these stories out there? They need to be told.
[Guest]: So that's when I decided I would sit down and do a book on the Deccan Sultans.
[Amit Varma]: And then yeah, that's when the project picked up.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of go through the timeline of the book now, which is incredibly fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And your story in a sense starts in the 13th century with the Delhi Sultanate.
[Amit Varma]: And I was struck by an early bit of fake news about a character
[Amit Varma]: who's not really a character in your book at all.
[Amit Varma]: But you sort of mentioned him early on, which is Ghiyasuddin Balban.
[Amit Varma]: And Balban had never actually conquered South India or even been there or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But he got a Sanskrit inscription commissioned, which basically said,
[Amit Varma]: quote, he issued forth on a military expedition.
[Amit Varma]: The Gaudas abdicated their glory.
[Amit Varma]: The Andhras, through fear, besought the shelter of the caves.
[Amit Varma]: The Keralas forsook their pleasures.
[Amit Varma]: The Karnatas hid themselves in defiles.
[Amit Varma]: The Maharashtras gave their place.
[Amit Varma]: The Gujaras resigned their vigor.
[Amit Varma]: And the Lathas dwarfed themselves into Kiratas.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And it's, you know, just as an early example of fake news.
[Amit Varma]: And there are like sort of examples of fake news throughout your book.
[Amit Varma]: For example, you have one of his near contemporaries, Ramchandra Yadav.
[Amit Varma]: With breathtaking humility, you mentioned, he compares himself
[Amit Varma]: to the mythological great boar in suckering the earth from the oppressions of the Turukas,
[Amit Varma]: which is, of course, the Turks.
[Guest]: And he never encountered a Turk.
[Guest]: Never seen a Turk till then.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So your book immediately humanizes this by, you know,
[Amit Varma]: placing it in a context that even we can understand today immediately.
[Guest]: So the thing is, you know, Indian kings had this habit.
[Guest]: It was part of an old Sanskritic tradition,
[Guest]: which is that you draw your legitimacy,
[Guest]: A, by connecting yourself to old institutions, temples,
[Guest]: previous dynasties sometimes.
[Guest]: But also by these exaggerated declarations,
[Guest]: normally in these classical languages.
[Guest]: So although Balban is the Sultan of the Delhi Sultanate,
[Guest]: he's writing in Sanskrit here.
[Guest]: And the funny thing is a little later,
[Guest]: you have the emperor of Vijayanagar making the same claims
[Guest]: about North Indian people he's never seen.
[Guest]: Even in Shivaji's time, you have similar claims,
[Guest]: where even the Madras rulers, which is essentially the British,
[Guest]: even they're included in inscriptions,
[Guest]: as though everybody's running away at the sight of Shivaji's armies.
[Guest]: The idea is kings try to project this supernatural power,
[Guest]: because that's how kingship was constructed in India.
[Guest]: The idea was, it was pointless if you merely had power.
[Guest]: Power had to be demonstrated.
[Guest]: How? Through great rituals, through great processions.
[Guest]: Why do we have this great love of processions and display?
[Guest]: Exactly this.
[Guest]: If you had power, you had to show it.
[Guest]: Why is it that Mughal emperors had to appear at that window
[Guest]: in the fort every day?
[Guest]: Because otherwise, if you didn't appear consistently for a few days,
[Guest]: people thought you were dead.
[Guest]: Which meant what? Chaos.
[Guest]: You don't know who the next ruler is going to be.
[Guest]: So power had to be demonstrated.
[Guest]: These inscriptions essentially do the same thing,
[Guest]: where they're trying to project to the elites that,
[Guest]: oh my God, look at my influence.
[Guest]: All these people bow before me.
[Guest]: They may not necessarily.
[Guest]: It's not completely true.
[Guest]: But it's a way of sort of suggesting that,
[Guest]: look, I am the most potent of them all.
[Guest]: I am the one who dominates the landscape.
[Guest]: Your subjects don't know better,
[Guest]: because their lives are fairly localized.
[Guest]: But when you make this claim,
[Guest]: you sort of elevate yourself to this degree,
[Guest]: where you're special, your power becomes then unquestioned.
[Guest]: And you know, you go into a league of great rulers and emperors and others.
[Guest]: And people are also imitating previous rulers.
[Guest]: So each of these inscriptions is imitating a previous inscription.
[Guest]: Which is why every dynasty, every area of this country,
[Guest]: when it comes to the Sanskrit language and these common themes,
[Guest]: you find similar sort of bombastic, flamboyant claims,
[Guest]: because they're all trying to look impressive and over majestic.
[Amit Varma]: And this is obviously before the age of mass media.
[Amit Varma]: So in a sense, this signaling that is happening,
[Amit Varma]: is happening for a very limited audience.
[Amit Varma]: And part of that audience might be the emperor himself,
[Guest]: or whoever the person is.
[Guest]: I mean, it's almost like, you know, you want to look at it this way.
[Guest]: You're a small minority of Muslim elites,
[Guest]: ruling over a largely Hindu territory.
[Guest]: One way of convincing yourself that you have the power,
[Guest]: is by repeating it constantly.
[Guest]: Even the British were no less.
[Guest]: Even they had a similar habit of these, you know, bombastic proclamations.
[Guest]: You know, Queen Victoria's proclamation was built up into this big hoo-ha.
[Guest]: But really, how many people in villages knew who Queen Victoria was,
[Guest]: or what she was saying?
[Guest]: Nobody did.
[Guest]: Why did the British build these grand monuments?
[Guest]: Because buildings were trying to convey the idea,
[Guest]: project majesty and power,
[Guest]: which they may not necessarily have had.
[Guest]: So all of this goes into that fiction of power.
[Guest]: The idea that, you know, the more I say it, the more it becomes real.
[Guest]: The more the chances that people start taking this seriously.
[Guest]: Because otherwise, frankly, the reality of these kings, as I said,
[Guest]: is that they were pretty much human like us.
[Guest]: But if the people knew you were human, then hold on,
[Guest]: why are we listening to you?
[Guest]: Why are we your obedient subjects?
[Guest]: You have to make yourself special.
[Guest]: In The Ivory Throne, I have this,
[Guest]: what I found a very fascinating episode where
[Guest]: the king, Marthanda Varma, he's created this new kingdom of Travancore in Kerala
[Guest]: by conquering a whole lot of places.
[Guest]: And till then, he's first among equals.
[Guest]: You know, first among all the nobles.
[Guest]: In his early career, a lot of the nobles were trying to kill him.
[Guest]: But suddenly he realizes that you have to elevate royal blood to a very special degree
[Guest]: so that, you know, even spilling royal blood becomes a sin.
[Guest]: How does he do it?
[Guest]: He goes to this old Sanskritic ritual called Hiranyagarbha
[Guest]: where they essentially get a golden cow.
[Guest]: They construct a cow made of gold.
[Guest]: And the Raja goes in from the mouth of the cow.
[Guest]: He's essentially just a regular warrior.
[Guest]: He sits inside the cow for a certain duration.
[Guest]: Brahmins pelt it with flowers and things to sort of,
[Guest]: and chant mantras of birth.
[Guest]: And then he pops out from under the tail of the cow
[Guest]: and he's considered reborn.
[Guest]: He's suddenly descended from the sun and the moon
[Guest]: and Suryavamshi, whatever you want.
[Guest]: And he becomes a twice-born Kshatriya
[Guest]: who can wear a sacred thread and all of that.
[Guest]: It's a second birth, but it's also a birth that's elevating him from everybody else.
[Guest]: Now nobody else may touch him.
[Guest]: Nobody else may eat with him.
[Guest]: Only Brahmins can eat with him.
[Guest]: So by doing that, he slowly starts elevating his thing.
[Guest]: Every time a member of the family goes out,
[Guest]: there's a procession attending to them.
[Guest]: All of this is visually reinforcing the idea
[Guest]: that this family or this dynasty is special.
[Guest]: So these inscriptions, these kings, their recordings, their sayings,
[Guest]: they're all exaggerated to a degree
[Guest]: because all of them are trying to cement power.
[Guest]: At the end of the day, everyone knows power comes and goes.
[Guest]: If all these claims were true, these dynasties would have never fallen.
[Guest]: Why is it that every dynasty falls
[Guest]: and then the next dynasty makes the same claims?
[Guest]: Because they're all trying to show up as much power as possible.
[Guest]: And like today, propaganda, PR, it all matters.
[Guest]: We still in our own times have a prime minister
[Guest]: who has a habit of saying things that don't always add up
[Guest]: when you look at the facts.
[Guest]: But the idea is, you know, what you say matters.
[Guest]: The image you project,
[Guest]: the potency you can show yourself as possessing,
[Guest]: all of that matters.
[Guest]: And this is what they were trying to do at that time.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's fascinating to think about modern ways
[Amit Varma]: of signaling the same things.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I can't see our prime minister
[Amit Varma]: entering the mouth of a cow, literally.
[Amit Varma]: But he's worshipping cows in other ways.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: So your narrative really starts get going,
[Amit Varma]: let's say around 1290 when Balban's dynasty is wiped out
[Amit Varma]: and the Khiljis come to power and the nephew
[Amit Varma]: of first Khilji Sultan, Alauddin is sent down south.
[Amit Varma]: So let's start then.
[Guest]: He actually comes down south partly for his own ambition,
[Guest]: which is that he, you know, he realizes the south has wealth.
[Guest]: Now they've got most of the north in their hand now.
[Amit Varma]: And if I may interrupt, you also point out that
[Amit Varma]: legend suggests that he left court to get as far away as he could
[Amit Varma]: from a nagging wife and overbearing mother-in-law.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: What sources give you this?
[Guest]: You know, you can read about in Ferishta
[Guest]: and a bunch of other places.
[Guest]: The idea again though is that,
[Guest]: so every time you have a historical source,
[Guest]: you have to interrogate it for multiple things.
[Guest]: Who's written it?
[Guest]: What is the intended audience?
[Guest]: What is the language?
[Guest]: And what is it achieving?
[Guest]: So, you know, if it's written in Persian,
[Guest]: it's not for your lay reader on the ground.
[Guest]: It's not for the average peasant.
[Guest]: It's again targeting a certain elite.
[Guest]: Now when making this claim that he was only trying to get away
[Guest]: from a mother-in-law and just happened to come down south
[Guest]: and, you know, conquer a kingdom.
[Guest]: All of this is trying to sort of build up a parallel narrative.
[Guest]: In reality, the man knew exactly what he was doing.
[Guest]: He knew there was wealth in the south.
[Guest]: The thing is, look, the Khiljis are a new dynasty, right?
[Guest]: Which means they haven't been cemented in power yet.
[Guest]: So if he topples his uncle, he can quickly claim power.
[Guest]: And therefore, he needs money to bribe nobles,
[Guest]: to get people onto his side.
[Guest]: So for an independent source of wealth,
[Guest]: he needs to come south
[Guest]: because the north is entirely in his uncle's hands.
[Guest]: Where can he get independent wealth and money and gold?
[Guest]: In the south.
[Guest]: So the Yadavas may be writing poetry about how the Turks
[Guest]: and the Muslims are shivering at the thought of them.
[Guest]: But they've never actually seen a Turk.
[Guest]: And when Al-Awwadun shows up,
[Guest]: they're completely ill-prepared
[Guest]: because their own armies are in the south
[Guest]: fighting with the Hoysalas.
[Guest]: And the king of the Yadavas, Ramachandra,
[Guest]: essentially locks himself up in the fort,
[Guest]: but very quickly realizes that he has an impregnable fort,
[Guest]: but he has no food.
[Guest]: So finally, he comes to terms with Al-Awwadun.
[Guest]: And just then, his son comes back from the south with his army.
[Guest]: And there you have another...
[Guest]: It's not fake news as such,
[Guest]: but it's a very clever strategy where
[Guest]: Al-Awwadun Khilji realizes he's outnumbered
[Guest]: and sends a bunch of horsemen into the distance
[Guest]: to just, you know, trot about on this distant field for a bit
[Guest]: so that so much dust is raised,
[Guest]: it starts looking like a big army is coming to aid him.
[Guest]: And the Yadavas are horrified.
[Guest]: They think there's some massive imperial army coming from the north.
[Guest]: And they come to terms with Al-Awwadun Khilji
[Guest]: who then happily walks away from Devagiri
[Guest]: with heaps and mountains of gold
[Guest]: and takes it to the north, topples his uncle
[Guest]: and becomes the next sultan.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, when you're talking about that tactical maneuver
[Amit Varma]: where he had his thousand horsemen
[Amit Varma]: raise such a whirl of dust in the distance
[Amit Varma]: that the Yadavas believe this inspired Gannad,
[Amit Varma]: you also have a really nice sentence
[Amit Varma]: which gives a taste of the book to the reader.
[Amit Varma]: Quote, and so it was that a ghost army
[Amit Varma]: behind a blur of earth and wind
[Amit Varma]: brought Devagiri to its knees.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And Devagiri, of course, is the capital of the Yadavas
[Amit Varma]: which later becomes Zolatabad.
[Amit Varma]: As you point out, lay a scene for me
[Amit Varma]: at the time that Khilji goes to the Deccan.
[Amit Varma]: There are essentially three sort of ruling kingdoms
[Amit Varma]: or dynasties or whatever
[Amit Varma]: which eventually vanish very fast within the next 50 years.
[Amit Varma]: But just sort of tell us a little bit about
[Guest]: what those three are.
[Guest]: So that's why I've chosen this particular period
[Guest]: for rebel sultans which is, you know,
[Guest]: it begins in the 1290s
[Guest]: and it ends with the fall of these sultanates
[Guest]: in the late 17th century, in the 1680s.
[Guest]: And what's interesting is that this is the Islamic period
[Guest]: that we have in the Deccan.
[Guest]: Because before Khilji shows up,
[Guest]: what you have in what is primarily the Maharashtra region
[Guest]: is the Yadavas ruling from Devagiri.
[Guest]: In Karnataka it's the Hoysalas
[Guest]: and then in Telangana you have the Kakatiyas.
[Guest]: And these three dynasties are old,
[Guest]: they have their own claims of Sanskritic glory and so on.
[Guest]: And they are all fighting each other obviously.
[Amit Varma]: So the Kakatiyas are in Warangal,
[Amit Varma]: the Hoysalas are based in Dwarsamudra.
[Amit Varma]: For the modern Indian,
[Amit Varma]: just give a context of what these areas would be.
[Guest]: So yeah, I'd say you can basically overlap them
[Guest]: with modern day Karnataka for the Hoysalas,
[Guest]: Telangana for the Kakatiyas
[Guest]: and then Maharashtra for the Yadavas.
[Guest]: Because by this time you also see the evolution of these languages.
[Guest]: You see Karnataka, you know, building up Karnataka
[Guest]: and a sort of, you know, common Karnataka identity
[Guest]: through language.
[Guest]: In Maharashtra you see the Marathi language
[Guest]: evolving at the same time.
[Guest]: And Telanganas had this long-standing culture as well of their own.
[Guest]: And the Kakatiyas are particularly interesting
[Guest]: because I mentioned these bombastic Sanskritic inscriptions and so on.
[Guest]: One place where this sort of Sanskritism is conspicuous
[Guest]: in its absence is in the Kakatiya dynasty
[Guest]: where with one exception all the kings embraced
[Guest]: what is called Shudra status.
[Guest]: They didn't want to be twice born,
[Guest]: sacred thread wearing Sanskritic Kshatriyas.
[Guest]: They were more than happy being Shudras.
[Guest]: Richard Eaton's fascinating research on how
[Guest]: most of the nobles in the last Kakatiya king,
[Guest]: they hadn't inherited their place at court through the logic of blood.
[Guest]: They'd actually worked for it.
[Guest]: There was upward mobility that was possible.
[Guest]: There were great public works that the Kakatiyas had installed in Telangana.
[Guest]: So it's very interesting how each kingdom has its own flavor.
[Guest]: Each was of course phenomenally wealthy.
[Guest]: And one big reason was that these are all peninsular kingdoms.
[Guest]: So a difference is that in the north where an empire means great size,
[Guest]: in the south you don't necessarily need to be that large to be of equal wealth
[Guest]: because being in the peninsula you have trade
[Guest]: which the north also has trade of course but in a very different way.
[Guest]: When you have seaports you have another source of income
[Guest]: which northern empires don't have.
[Guest]: So northern empires also realized that as you come further south
[Guest]: you get access to these additional sources of revenue.
[Guest]: You get ports, you get trade and so on.
[Guest]: So these southern kingdoms existed in a little cocoon of their own.
[Guest]: They knew what was happening in the north.
[Guest]: They knew that Islamic power had been established in Delhi and the surroundings there.
[Guest]: But they didn't quite realize that they were going to come for them as such.
[Guest]: I mean it wasn't, you know, we can now say that India we have these particular boundaries.
[Guest]: In those days these boundaries didn't exist.
[Guest]: The north was as alien then as you know we may today find Afghanistan alien.
[Amit Varma]: It was just as different as that.
[Amit Varma]: And it's easy to say with hindsight that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: had these three kingdoms sort of stayed united and fought together
[Amit Varma]: they could have prevailed.
[Amit Varma]: I mean the same criticism that you later make of the rebel sultans
[Amit Varma]: that it's only when, you know, they are split up and on different sides
[Amit Varma]: that they kind of fall apart.
[Amit Varma]: But these guys didn't have that early lesson.
[Amit Varma]: Like one of Alauddin's dreaded generals was Malik Kafur
[Amit Varma]: and the Yadavas actually helped Malik Kafur fight the Kakatiyas.
[Guest]: Because, you know, as I said there was no,
[Guest]: for people who try to project nationalism and these sentiments to the past
[Guest]: it's unhistorical for the simple reason that people didn't see it that way.
[Guest]: In the past power was held by a series of elite interests
[Guest]: that wasn't held in the name of any grand nationalistic ideology
[Guest]: which meant that, you know, okay we've now come to terms
[Guest]: that guy is still my enemy let's go eat him for breakfast together.
[Guest]: So, you know, that sort of mentality was there
[Guest]: which is why after the Yadavas were taken
[Guest]: they are the ones who showed the way to the other kingdoms in the south
[Guest]: to Warangal and to Hoysalas because they knew that these were my enemies.
[Guest]: Why should I suffer alone?
[Guest]: You know, let's try and destabilize them as well.
[Guest]: So, on the one hand the Yadavas are trying also to kick off the northern yoke.
[Guest]: They don't want to be under the Delhi sultans.
[Guest]: But while the Delhi army is there
[Guest]: let's also use them to get rid of our own ancestral enemies.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a fascinating nugget here that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: when Mohammed bin Tughlaq comes into the peace later on
[Amit Varma]: and there's a cousin of his who's fighting with him
[Amit Varma]: who takes refuge with the Hoysalas
[Amit Varma]: and I just want to quote this full paragraph because it's fantastic.
[Amit Varma]: The Sultan ordered the prisoner to be skinned alive
[Amit Varma]: and as his skin was torn off, his flesh was cooked with rice.
[Amit Varma]: Some was sent to his children and his wife
[Amit Varma]: and the remainder was put into a great dish and given to the elephants to eat.
[Amit Varma]: The elephants, we know reassuringly, refused to touch this ghastly offering
[Amit Varma]: but the wail of the poor widow can only be imagined.
[Amit Varma]: Her husband's skin was stuffed with straw and exhibited through the country
[Amit Varma]: as a lesson for all who might harbor romantic notions about resisting the Sultan
[Amit Varma]: in the name of their own glory or to satisfy their own ambitions."
[Amit Varma]: These were pretty gruesome times, weren't they?
[Guest]: I mean, power and violence went hand in hand at that time.
[Guest]: You know, this often happens on Twitter
[Guest]: where people selectively pull out a random Muslim Sultan
[Guest]: saying, so barbaric, so violent.
[Guest]: And like, hold on, everybody was violent at this time.
[Guest]: It wasn't the monopoly of one faith or one set of people
[Guest]: because in those days, if you wanted to have power,
[Guest]: you had to be willing to shed blood.
[Guest]: So, you know, for everybody who says,
[Guest]: oh, the Mughals killed their brothers to claim power.
[Guest]: I'm sorry, that happened in Vijayanagar also.
[Guest]: A brother killed a brother, a son killed a father.
[Guest]: That happened in Vijayanagar.
[Guest]: Devaraya II, one of the most charismatic and famous Vijayanagar emperors
[Guest]: had a coup either orchestrated by a nephew or a cousin.
[Guest]: The exact relationship was not clear, but a close family member.
[Guest]: In the end, Devaraya survives.
[Guest]: But what does he do?
[Guest]: He cuts his head off, gets it in his hand
[Guest]: and rides a horse across the capital
[Guest]: just to show people that I'm still alive and my enemy is gone.
[Guest]: That blood, the gore, it was all very natural at the time
[Guest]: because as I said, if you wanted to hold on to your power,
[Guest]: you had to be willing to, you know,
[Guest]: rip off people's heads and do these gruesome things.
[Guest]: And sometimes the gruesome things were done also to make,
[Guest]: to sort of establish a lesson for others
[Guest]: who might have such similar notions,
[Guest]: which was that if you do this, the punishment will not be kind.
[Guest]: You will not be comfortably poisoned to death or anything.
[Amit Varma]: It will be painful. It will be slow.
[Amit Varma]: The chilling effect.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, in that whole Devaraya incident,
[Amit Varma]: where his cousin or uncle, whoever it is,
[Amit Varma]: he sets that up, like before he goes to Devaraya,
[Amit Varma]: you describe the scene, which is right out of Game of Thrones.
[Amit Varma]: He has this elaborate banquet at his house
[Amit Varma]: and he calls all the people close to Devaraya
[Amit Varma]: and there's a beating of drums and there is a lot of noise there
[Amit Varma]: so that, you know, people can't really hear much.
[Amit Varma]: And then one by one at different times,
[Amit Varma]: because they're supposed to have dinner at different times,
[Amit Varma]: according to their, this thing,
[Amit Varma]: they're taken into the eating room and they're ritually slaughtered.
[Amit Varma]: And after a sufficient number of them have been slaughtered,
[Amit Varma]: he actually goes to Devaraya and tries to do it there
[Amit Varma]: and gets beheaded for his efforts.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, at multiple points through the book,
[Amit Varma]: you talk about people being trampled to death by mad elephants,
[Amit Varma]: which is fascinating.
[Guest]: So you don't just put them to death.
[Guest]: And you figure out like really creative ways.
[Guest]: Everything is a scene.
[Guest]: Everything has to be done in public
[Guest]: and everything has to be done in as powerful a way as possible
[Guest]: so that the message goes out.
[Guest]: Don't come and, you know, fiddle with me
[Guest]: because you will pay and pay badly.
[Guest]: Because as I said, power at this time,
[Guest]: although these inscriptions make all these claims,
[Guest]: as we were discussing earlier,
[Guest]: it's actually very volatile.
[Guest]: You have to have the right number of allies,
[Guest]: you have to have the right number of nobles on your side,
[Guest]: the right number of horses,
[Guest]: the right number of artillerymen.
[Guest]: If you don't have all this,
[Guest]: your power starts very quickly going.
[Guest]: See, even at this time,
[Guest]: there were no fixed borders either.
[Guest]: So, for example, you often find that there were,
[Guest]: for example, Maratha, you know, Deshmukhs or village heads
[Guest]: in border territories.
[Guest]: And one season they may ally with this king on this side.
[Guest]: You may find that next year he's allying with the other king.
[Guest]: So the border is constantly shifting.
[Guest]: How many power interests you can keep on your side
[Guest]: determine your power.
[Guest]: And fear is a great weapon.
[Guest]: And fear is a very important asset there
[Guest]: because if they fear you,
[Guest]: then they'll listen to you.
[Guest]: If you have money,
[Guest]: then they will listen to you.
[Guest]: And finally, you have to have some claims to legitimacy.
[Guest]: And if you don't,
[Guest]: you have to invent these claims to legitimacy.
[Guest]: So even the rebel sultans,
[Guest]: when they all broke off from Delhi
[Guest]: and the Delhi sultans and established their own power,
[Guest]: they're all scrambling for legitimacy.
[Guest]: And this isn't merely the Islamic kings.
[Guest]: The Hindu kings do the same.
[Guest]: So Vijayanagara tries to concoct,
[Guest]: find its own legitimacy
[Guest]: by concocting relationships with previous dynasties.
[Guest]: So you know,
[Guest]: the early emperors are claimed to be
[Guest]: through marriage related to the Hoysalas
[Guest]: or you know,
[Guest]: some connection with Telangana is also found.
[Guest]: In fact, one of the most enduring stories
[Guest]: is that the founders of Vijayanagara
[Guest]: were actually captured,
[Guest]: taken to Delhi,
[Guest]: converted to Islam.
[Guest]: And then when they came back to the south,
[Guest]: they sort of threw off that
[Guest]: and went back to being Hindus.
[Guest]: But that's why Vidyaranya, the sage,
[Guest]: advised them to sort of
[Guest]: rule in the name of Virupaksha, their deity.
[Guest]: Because that would take away the taint of having converted.
[Guest]: What is it trying to do?
[Guest]: Claiming legitimacy.
[Guest]: The Sultans,
[Guest]: they were all trying to get legitimacy.
[Guest]: The later Sultans from the Persian Shah,
[Guest]: because the Persian Shah was a superior force,
[Guest]: or from one of the Caliphs of Islam.
[Guest]: Because by doing this,
[Guest]: you find a way to
[Guest]: get your stamp recognized as legal.
[Guest]: Otherwise, you know,
[Guest]: if you have the right number of forces,
[Guest]: anybody can take power.
[Guest]: Even Shivaji, you know,
[Guest]: after he conquered and built his initial
[Guest]: Samraj as it were,
[Guest]: his Hindavi Swaraj,
[Guest]: what happens is that
[Guest]: he also goes for an elaborate coronation ceremony.
[Guest]: He also acquires the sacred thread.
[Guest]: He also remarries all his wives
[Guest]: using Sanskritic rituals.
[Guest]: All of it is doing what?
[Guest]: He is connecting himself to an older tradition
[Guest]: and legitimizing his conquests.
[Guest]: Till then, everybody can treat him as a warlord.
[Guest]: But having gone through the coronation,
[Guest]: he becomes a legitimate king.
[Guest]: And he himself in a letter notes how
[Guest]: after the coronation when he met the Kutub Shah,
[Guest]: the Kutub Shah would earlier expect Shivaji
[Guest]: to sort of do this prostration
[Guest]: like everybody else in front of him.
[Guest]: But once Shivaji had gone through these rituals,
[Guest]: he was received as an equal.
[Guest]: So all of this was again an effort to legitimize.
[Guest]: And violence was also an instrument for this.
[Guest]: Upindar Singh has written about violence in India.
[Guest]: It's a book spanning several thousand years.
[Guest]: And you find that violence was always there.
[Guest]: It's only now that we can sit in times
[Guest]: and think that violence was sparingly used
[Guest]: or whatever because that's what we know.
[Guest]: But back in the day, violence was ubiquitous.
[Guest]: It was everywhere.
[Guest]: It had to be everywhere.
[Guest]: Otherwise, even your remote local sense of power,
[Guest]: being a village head or whatever,
[Guest]: everything depended on how many swords you had.
[Amit Varma]: So let's kind of get back to Khilji for a moment
[Amit Varma]: on how Khilji basically over a period of time,
[Amit Varma]: not Khilji per se himself alone,
[Amit Varma]: but these three started the process
[Amit Varma]: by which these three empires got wiped out in the south.
[Guest]: So he comes to the south.
[Guest]: He obviously gets all the money from Devagiri
[Guest]: and then goes back.
[Guest]: It's his eunuch lover Malik Afur
[Guest]: who eventually comes and finishes the job
[Guest]: by one by one picking off these kingdoms
[Guest]: and taking over.
[Guest]: And what you then find is that these Hindu kingdoms
[Guest]: or empires, whatever you will,
[Guest]: they start folding and collapsing
[Guest]: and various either local powers emerge,
[Guest]: which is that when there's a vacuum,
[Guest]: other ambitious people locally will emerge to claim it
[Guest]: or sometimes as you have in Madurai,
[Guest]: a new Muslim Sultanate emerged there
[Guest]: because one problem the Delhi Sultans faced consistently
[Guest]: while they had any influence in the south
[Guest]: was that they would send nobles to the south
[Guest]: but the distance was so large
[Guest]: that these nobles are too often tempted to rebel
[Guest]: and sort of establish their own independent kingdoms.
[Guest]: So the guy sent off to Madurai decided,
[Guest]: why am I paying tribute to Delhi?
[Guest]: I'm so far away.
[Guest]: I can become an independent Sultan.
[Guest]: So he does that.
[Guest]: You know, people often present Vijayanagar
[Guest]: as a dharmic Hindu cause.
[Guest]: Well, then they would have prevented the Hoysalas
[Guest]: and the other dynasties from falling.
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: They also took advantage of the fall of these kingdoms.
[Guest]: They didn't stall them.
[Guest]: They merely made sure that as these kingdoms were falling,
[Amit Varma]: they were occupying the vacuum that came.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, as I think you pointed out,
[Amit Varma]: the five brothers who founded the Vijayanagar kingdom
[Amit Varma]: were also claiming legitimacy
[Amit Varma]: by claiming to be descended from the previous kingdoms
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: They all had various ways of, you know,
[Guest]: trying to make their conquests look as legal as possible.
[Guest]: But what they were all doing,
[Guest]: what Alauddin Khilji essentially did was
[Guest]: he destabilized this entire region.
[Guest]: Everything started falling.
[Guest]: And once these existing powers fell,
[Guest]: it became a free-for-all.
[Guest]: Anybody who had the capacity could build something new.
[Guest]: As it happened in the northern Deccan,
[Guest]: it was the Bamani Sultanate that eventually emerged.
[Guest]: In the southern Deccan, it was Vijayanagar that emerged.
[Guest]: And then these two entities were locked in conflict
[Amit Varma]: constantly with each other.
[Amit Varma]: What would enable this was also, you know,
[Amit Varma]: a classic, the blunder by Tughlaq.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, we remember Tughlaq for the shift to Daulatabad in 1327,
[Amit Varma]: which of course was a blunder
[Amit Varma]: and the army had to kind of go back after a while.
[Amit Varma]: And even this is told very entertainingly by you
[Amit Varma]: because you write about how he forced all of Delhi
[Amit Varma]: to shift to Daulatabad
[Amit Varma]: and this included a blind man who didn't want to go.
[Amit Varma]: And he was actually dragged to Daulatabad.
[Amit Varma]: So he started losing his limbs.
[Amit Varma]: And when he actually reached Daulatabad,
[Amit Varma]: he had only one leg.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's a, it's an,
[Guest]: I'm pretty sure it's an apocryphal story,
[Guest]: but it's an entertaining one.
[Guest]: The idea being, this is,
[Guest]: this is one chronicler's way of saying that
[Guest]: this was how drastic the move was.
[Guest]: I'm pretty sure this didn't happen
[Guest]: because whoever was pulling would have realized
[Guest]: that the man was falling away in bits on the way.
[Guest]: But the idea was that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: everybody had to move.
[Amit Varma]: And it's absolutely fantastic.
[Amit Varma]: But the real blunder was in 1345,
[Amit Varma]: what Tughlaq kind of did was that
[Amit Varma]: he recalled his old guard governor from Daulatabad
[Amit Varma]: and there was now this internecine battle
[Amit Varma]: between the old guard,
[Amit Varma]: whom he was trying to get rid of
[Amit Varma]: with these new people
[Guest]: who he thought would be loyal to him.
[Guest]: So he, what he did was,
[Guest]: because all these people going to the south
[Guest]: were too readily tempted to sort of
[Guest]: stand up in rebellion and claim independence,
[Guest]: he thought he would create a new aristocracy
[Guest]: who would be personally loyal to them.
[Guest]: So of course you have a critic of this saying
[Guest]: that cooks and cobblers and everybody's sons
[Guest]: were overnight turned into noblemen
[Guest]: and then the old guard was expected
[Guest]: to relinquish power to them.
[Guest]: Now this could also be a legitimizing trick
[Guest]: for the old guard
[Guest]: because they ended up breaking away from Delhi.
[Guest]: So they made it look like,
[Guest]: oh look, we are the legitimate ones.
[Guest]: This king is bringing low born people to power
[Guest]: which is not correct
[Guest]: and therefore we are breaking away
[Guest]: from his unjust rule.
[Guest]: But in the end that failed
[Guest]: because if he tried to create a new aristocracy
[Guest]: it didn't work.
[Guest]: The old aristocracy managed to hold together
[Guest]: and create an independent sultanate in the south
[Guest]: which was of course the Bamani Sultanate
[Guest]: where they ended up selecting their first sultan
[Guest]: almost by lottery
[Guest]: because they chose the most efficient among them
[Guest]: and he is the one who became the first Bamani Sultan.
[Amit Varma]: And that was Hasan Gangu who called himself
[Amit Varma]: Abul Muzaffar Alauddin Behman Shah
[Amit Varma]: and there was some sort of speculation
[Amit Varma]: about his surname itself, Behman.
[Amit Varma]: Why is he calling himself that?
[Guest]: People think that he was a servant to a Brahmin
[Guest]: and this was some way of commemorating
[Guest]: his original master.
[Guest]: Another theory is that he was half Hindu
[Guest]: which is likely
[Guest]: because even the Tughlaqs took Hindu wives.
[Guest]: So the later Tughlaqs
[Guest]: as you come further down the family tree
[Guest]: they are all essentially the sons of Hindu mothers.
[Guest]: So it's very likely that Hasan Gangu's mother
[Guest]: was also Brahmin.
[Guest]: But of course connecting Baman to Brahmin
[Guest]: is a little too convenient
[Guest]: and therefore it's very unlikely
[Guest]: this was the origin of that title.
[Guest]: And in reality we know that he grew up in Multan.
[Guest]: He was involved in the sultanate.
[Guest]: He even served in Afghanistan briefly
[Guest]: and he had his own career.
[Guest]: He was essentially a top level nobleman.
[Guest]: He had led a botched rebellion at one time
[Guest]: but then when the Deccan was finally breaking away
[Guest]: he landed up on the scene
[Guest]: did a very good job
[Guest]: and impressed all his peers
[Guest]: and therefore they ended up making him sultan.
[Amit Varma]: And what's interesting was that
[Amit Varma]: he immediately abolished Jazia long before Akbar
[Amit Varma]: and you point out there's possibly two reasons for this.
[Amit Varma]: One is just real politic
[Amit Varma]: because he was helped in his quest to power
[Amit Varma]: by a bunch of Hindu chieftains.
[Amit Varma]: So obviously he's going to want to keep him on their good side.
[Amit Varma]: And two, to distinguish himself from the brutal Naudis
[Amit Varma]: in a manner of speaking.
[Amit Varma]: And this also sort of ties back to something
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned in your book
[Amit Varma]: about how there are sort of two faces of Islam in India
[Amit Varma]: and one is you have Islam coming pre the 10th century to South India
[Amit Varma]: and it's very peaceful
[Amit Varma]: and there are traders
[Amit Varma]: and there are perhaps even refugees
[Amit Varma]: who are getting away from where they are coming from
[Amit Varma]: and they are immediately integrated into the culture
[Amit Varma]: and it's all very peaceful.
[Amit Varma]: And the other is invasions from the North
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And that struck me as pretty fascinating.
[Guest]: Yeah, the South, you know,
[Guest]: this is the thing where I mentioned
[Guest]: that there is a Northern bias in Indian history
[Guest]: because if you look at everything from the North
[Guest]: you get one perspective
[Guest]: which is that Islam came to India how?
[Guest]: When the swords were raised in the Sindh.
[Guest]: Now if you look at the same issue
[Guest]: which is Islam's arrival in India from the South
[Guest]: completely different perspective
[Guest]: because if legend is to be believed
[Guest]: the oldest mosque in Kerala
[Guest]: was built in the lifetime of the Prophet himself
[Guest]: one year before the Prophet dies
[Guest]: you have this mosque being established in Kodungallur.
[Guest]: Okay, there is no proof of this
[Guest]: because the current building is not that old
[Guest]: but even then, two centuries later
[Guest]: in the 800s
[Guest]: you have inscriptional evidence
[Guest]: with Arabic signatures of Muslims
[Guest]: which is that Muslims are already witnessing
[Guest]: royal Hindu grants by this time
[Guest]: to have that kind of influence
[Guest]: they had at least been there for a hundred years
[Guest]: they had at least been there for a while
[Guest]: to have that kind of power.
[Guest]: So Islam came to the South
[Guest]: through peaceful embassies of commerce
[Guest]: they existed all around the Konkan coast
[Guest]: in fact, culturally Kerala has more in common
[Guest]: with Arabia than it has with North India
[Guest]: Delhi has more in common with Kabul
[Guest]: than it has with South India
[Guest]: and this is not very convenient now
[Guest]: for people to say
[Guest]: because we are now sort of completely infected
[Guest]: by this over-nationalistic bug
[Guest]: but that's how history was
[Guest]: people had various links in this way
[Guest]: and Islam therefore
[Guest]: in the South wasn't a disruptive force
[Guest]: people associated Islam with trade
[Guest]: and that is how even later in these sultanates
[Guest]: you find that a lot of culture
[Guest]: came through Islamic networks
[Guest]: so even now if you go to Tirupati
[Guest]: there are these famous bronzes
[Guest]: of Krishnadevaraya and his wife
[Guest]: the Vijayanagara emperor and his wife
[Guest]: go two of them
[Guest]: if you look at the bronze closely
[Guest]: now they've draped the women in saris or whatever
[Guest]: but they haven't covered Krishnadevaraya's head
[Guest]: he's wearing a Turkish hat
[Guest]: because Turkish fashions became fashionable
[Guest]: in Vijayanagara at that time
[Guest]: if you go to Hampi
[Guest]: you'll find that early stage remains
[Guest]: or the ruins in Hampi
[Guest]: typical, everybody's wearing the South Indian
[Guest]: munda or the veshti or whatever
[Guest]: and the torso is left bare
[Guest]: but as time passes
[Guest]: you see in later structures that have survived
[Guest]: the tunic starts appearing
[Guest]: in the Vitthala temple
[Guest]: there's a pillar which shows an Arab or a Muslim
[Guest]: on a horse
[Guest]: and this is in a temple
[Guest]: a Muslim enshrined forever on its walls
[Guest]: in its pillars
[Guest]: at the great platform
[Guest]: where all the great rituals are supposedly held
[Guest]: you see Arabs carved into the sides
[Guest]: and they're dancing and entertaining the Vijayanagara emperor
[Guest]: and so on
[Guest]: and most striking of all is
[Guest]: from the 1350s
[Guest]: the Vijayanagara emperors adopted a new title
[Guest]: which was Hinduraya Suratrana
[Guest]: interesting for two reasons
[Guest]: because Suratrana is the Sanskritization of Sultan
[Guest]: you find it in the Delhi Sultanate
[Guest]: where on the coins on one hand
[Guest]: on the one side you have the Arabic Sultan
[Guest]: on the other hand you have Suratrana
[Guest]: in Nepal when the Sultan of Bengal invades
[Guest]: Suratrana
[Guest]: even in Shah Jahan's time
[Guest]: the word for Sultan
[Guest]: in Sanskrit is Suratrana
[Guest]: so the Vijayanagara kings are calling themselves
[Guest]: Hinduraya Suratrana
[Guest]: which is Sultans among Hindu kings
[Guest]: which is that
[Guest]: funnily enough
[Guest]: they're the first people I think
[Guest]: who are appropriating Hindu
[Guest]: which is a word normally outsiders use
[Guest]: to everybody in India
[Guest]: and applying it to themselves
[Guest]: so saying among Hindu kings
[Guest]: we are the Sultans
[Guest]: which is that we are Hindus
[Guest]: but we are also Sultans
[Guest]: you find a Telugu lord also
[Guest]: calling himself Suratrana
[Guest]: so
[Guest]: Islamicate culture
[Guest]: was bringing all this to the south
[Guest]: you know it was bringing soft power
[Guest]: of a certain type
[Guest]: fashion
[Guest]: what you were wearing
[Guest]: what you were eating perhaps
[Guest]: what you were calling yourself
[Guest]: everything depended on these Islamic networks
[Guest]: which wasn't the story of the north
[Guest]: the north had a very different
[Guest]: experience with Islam
[Guest]: but there also
[Guest]: you find these compromises
[Guest]: because
[Guest]: Mahmud of Ghor for example
[Guest]: you know famous for destroying
[Guest]: temples and killing so many infidels
[Guest]: he happily boasts that he killed
[Guest]: so many thousand infidels
[Guest]: but at the same time
[Guest]: in the coins he minted
[Guest]: he had no option
[Guest]: but to have an infidel goddess Lakshmi
[Guest]: because otherwise
[Guest]: the infidels would not use his coins
[Guest]: so the thing is
[Guest]: for legitimizing yourself
[Guest]: for audiences in the Islamic world
[Guest]: you play up the idea
[Guest]: of you bringing Islam
[Guest]: to these eastern barbaric lands
[Guest]: whereas in reality
[Guest]: in the so called barbaric lands
[Guest]: you have to come to terms
[Guest]: with the people
[Guest]: which is what happened
[Guest]: in the Deccan as well
[Guest]: you come to power
[Guest]: but you realize very quickly
[Guest]: that you are a minority
[Guest]: you need local power
[Guest]: you need local assistance
[Guest]: that's how the Marathas emerged
[Guest]: as a very powerful caste
[Guest]: because they became
[Guest]: the middlemen
[Guest]: between the people on the ground
[Guest]: the agriculturists
[Guest]: and the Sultans
[Guest]: in the big towns and cities
[Guest]: because they were the ones
[Guest]: who knew the countryside
[Guest]: they were the ones
[Guest]: who rallied the armies
[Guest]: to fight for these Sultans
[Guest]: so the Maratha caste itself
[Guest]: rose to prominence
[Guest]: in the period of the Sultanates
[Guest]: because finally
[Guest]: they had a particular purpose
[Guest]: acting as the main
[Guest]: sort of intermediaries of power
[Guest]: as main brokers of power as well
[Amit Varma]: so I'm speculating here
[Amit Varma]: and thinking aloud
[Amit Varma]: this is probably very simplistic
[Amit Varma]: but the thought just struck me
[Amit Varma]: when you were speaking
[Amit Varma]: is that is it then possible
[Amit Varma]: that the reason
[Amit Varma]: that that simplistic
[Amit Varma]: Hindutva binary
[Amit Varma]: of Hindus good
[Amit Varma]: Muslims bad
[Amit Varma]: is more dominant
[Amit Varma]: in the North
[Amit Varma]: because the North
[Amit Varma]: has experienced Islam
[Amit Varma]: more in that way
[Guest]: I think that may be one example
[Guest]: because their introduction
[Guest]: to Islam
[Guest]: came through blood
[Guest]: and violence and war
[Guest]: that would lead to
[Guest]: a certain kind of
[Guest]: impression of Islam
[Guest]: in Kerala again
[Guest]: to give an example
[Guest]: the experience is a
[Guest]: polar opposite
[Guest]: because there has been
[Guest]: no violence till
[Guest]: the Moplah rebellion
[Guest]: in 1921
[Guest]: in the previous century
[Guest]: in the 19th century
[Guest]: there were what were
[Guest]: called the outrages
[Guest]: which had a religious element
[Guest]: there was a so called
[Guest]: Jihadi element to it
[Guest]: which is fascinating
[Guest]: but what is interesting
[Guest]: is that in Kerala
[Guest]: the Muslims
[Guest]: were so deeply
[Guest]: wedded into
[Guest]: the general Hindu society
[Guest]: there was no Parda
[Guest]: the women did not have Parda
[Guest]: there was a matrilineal
[Guest]: Muslim royal family
[Guest]: the family of the
[Guest]: Arakkal Bibi
[Guest]: which is completely
[Guest]: against the Sharia
[Guest]: you know in the
[Guest]: Arakkal family
[Guest]: it's the eldest child
[Guest]: that inherits
[Guest]: if it's a girl
[Guest]: it's called the Arakkal Bibi
[Guest]: if it's called
[Guest]: it's called the Ali Raja
[Guest]: but the point is
[Guest]: women had right of succession
[Guest]: and this is a woman
[Guest]: who corresponded
[Guest]: with the Turkish
[Guest]: Ottoman Sultan
[Guest]: and so on
[Guest]: but she was the product
[Guest]: of a matrilineal system
[Guest]: which is a very
[Guest]: Malayali upper caste thing
[Guest]: it's not an Islamic concept
[Guest]: there is also something
[Guest]: called the Moplah Ramayana
[Guest]: or the Muslim Ramayana
[Guest]: in Kerala
[Guest]: where Shurpanakha
[Guest]: tries to seduce Rama
[Guest]: and Rama says no no
[Guest]: but I have already
[Guest]: got a wife
[Guest]: so they were
[Guest]: very deeply wedded
[Guest]: to local society
[Guest]: just as the Christians were
[Guest]: you know their
[Guest]: oldest churches
[Guest]: just like the oldest
[Guest]: mosques in Kerala
[Guest]: there are no minarets
[Guest]: there are no domes
[Guest]: they are built
[Guest]: like Kerala structures
[Guest]: made of wood
[Guest]: with gables
[Guest]: and so on
[Guest]: and if you go to Calicut
[Guest]: there is something
[Guest]: called the Mishkal Palli
[Guest]: which is a mosque
[Guest]: built about 800 years ago
[Guest]: at some point
[Guest]: the Portuguese
[Guest]: come and destroy it
[Guest]: some 70-80 years later
[Guest]: in the 1570-72
[Guest]: I think
[Guest]: the Zamorin of Calicut
[Guest]: who is a Hindu ruler
[Guest]: goes to war
[Guest]: against the Portuguese
[Guest]: wins
[Guest]: dismantles
[Guest]: one of their forts
[Guest]: brings back all the wood
[Guest]: and reconstructs this mosque
[Guest]: that was demolished
[Guest]: some 70 years before
[Guest]: because
[Guest]: their identities
[Guest]: didn't depend on their
[Guest]: religious loyalties
[Guest]: or allegiances
[Guest]: they were much more than that
[Guest]: even the rebel Sultans
[Guest]: in general
[Guest]: the point I make is that
[Guest]: religion is not what
[Guest]: guided their politics
[Guest]: religion often lent
[Guest]: legitimacy
[Guest]: it often justified
[Guest]: what they were doing
[Guest]: but politics itself
[Guest]: was guided by the same
[Guest]: things that it is
[Guest]: even today guided by
[Guest]: which is power
[Guest]: greed
[Guest]: avarice
[Guest]: that sort of
[Amit Varma]: those human instincts
[Amit Varma]: in fact religion was
[Amit Varma]: almost in a sense
[Amit Varma]: a tool of their politics
[Amit Varma]: in the same way
[Amit Varma]: that for example
[Amit Varma]: one of the
[Amit Varma]: empires you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: declared itself Shia
[Amit Varma]: so it could then
[Amit Varma]: appeal to Persia
[Amit Varma]: to hey look after
[Amit Varma]: our interests
[Amit Varma]: and that's pretty much
[Amit Varma]: what Persia actually did
[Amit Varma]: Persia later intervening
[Amit Varma]: with the Mughal emperor
[Amit Varma]: saying hey
[Amit Varma]: leave the Deccan alone
[Amit Varma]: we'll give you land
[Guest]: somewhere else
[Guest]: but leave the Deccan alone
[Guest]: which was a funny
[Guest]: and somewhat odd
[Guest]: offer to make
[Guest]: because normally
[Guest]: the Mughals and the Persian
[Guest]: had a lot of influence
[Guest]: over the Sultans
[Guest]: and to actually
[Guest]: offer this to the Mughals
[Guest]: if they left the Deccan
[Guest]: alone
[Guest]: it showed how much
[Guest]: the Persians
[Guest]: viewed the Deccan
[Guest]: as their sphere of influence
[Guest]: and the Deccan Sultans
[Guest]: also had it very
[Guest]: comfortable because
[Guest]: the Shah of Iran
[Guest]: was far away
[Guest]: he was an ocean
[Guest]: he was across the sea
[Guest]: so it was convenient
[Guest]: to sort of claim
[Guest]: to be his vassals
[Guest]: because you didn't
[Guest]: really have to see him
[Guest]: you didn't really have
[Guest]: to deal with him
[Guest]: as such he wasn't
[Guest]: coming and breathing
[Guest]: down your backs
[Guest]: it gave you a degree
[Guest]: of autonomy
[Guest]: so when the Sultans
[Guest]: and the Deccan
[Guest]: played up their
[Guest]: Shia or Persian links
[Guest]: the Mughals got
[Guest]: only more aggravated
[Guest]: and more desirous
[Guest]: of conquering the Deccan
[Guest]: but yeah
[Guest]: as I said
[Guest]: these boundaries
[Guest]: that we have today
[Guest]: were not the boundaries
[Guest]: that were then in force
[Guest]: and you know
[Guest]: having links to Persia
[Guest]: having very active links
[Guest]: so much so that
[Guest]: the Shah of Iran
[Guest]: could ask the Qutub Shah
[Guest]: of Golconda
[Guest]: for a daughter
[Guest]: and the Qutub Shah
[Guest]: had the power
[Guest]: to say no
[Guest]: is interesting
[Guest]: because that meant
[Guest]: that they had their
[Guest]: own little ecosystem
[Guest]: oriented towards Persia
[Amit Varma]: and we have to go
[Amit Varma]: in for a commercial
[Amit Varma]: break now
[Amit Varma]: but before we
[Amit Varma]: that a final mention
[Amit Varma]: of Hassan Gangu
[Amit Varma]: with a little bit
[Amit Varma]: of fake news
[Amit Varma]: which I found
[Amit Varma]: very entertaining
[Amit Varma]: where you talk about
[Amit Varma]: how Hassan Gangu
[Amit Varma]: no doubt
[Amit Varma]: wanting to establish
[Amit Varma]: his own legitimacy
[Amit Varma]: sort of created
[Amit Varma]: this story
[Amit Varma]: which you mention
[Amit Varma]: as obviously
[Amit Varma]: apocryphal
[Amit Varma]: about the Nizamuddin
[Amit Varma]: Auliya
[Amit Varma]: that once he went
[Amit Varma]: to you know
[Amit Varma]: before he was a
[Amit Varma]: Sultan
[Amit Varma]: he went to meet
[Amit Varma]: the Nizamuddin
[Amit Varma]: and he said
[Amit Varma]: has left my door
[Guest]: another is waiting there
[Guest]: again
[Guest]: invent a story
[Guest]: to paper over
[Guest]: inconvenient corners
[Guest]: in history
[Guest]: that's also actually
[Guest]: a very Indian
[Guest]: tradition as well
[Amit Varma]: you create a legend
[Amit Varma]: when history
[Amit Varma]: doesn't work for you
[Unknown]: brilliant
[Unknown]: let's take a quick
[Unknown]: commercial break
[Unknown]: we'll be back
[Unknown]: in a minute
[Unknown]: hello hello hello
[Unknown]: welcome to another
[Unknown]: great week on
[Unknown]: IVM podcast
[Unknown]: if you aren't
[Unknown]: following us
[Unknown]: on social media
[Unknown]: please make sure
[Unknown]: you do
[Unknown]: we're launching a new
[Unknown]: show
[Unknown]: The Habit Coach
[Unknown]: with Ashton Doctor
[Unknown]: Ashton talks about
[Unknown]: small habits
[Unknown]: that will make
[Unknown]: your life easy
[Unknown]: he talks about
[Unknown]: health, fitness,
[Unknown]: de-stressing,
[Unknown]: meditation and finance
[Unknown]: so join every
[Unknown]: Monday, Wednesday
[Unknown]: and Friday
[Unknown]: starting the 10th
[Unknown]: of December
[Unknown]: Osiris S. Cyrus
[Unknown]: is joined by
[Unknown]: iconic journalist
[Unknown]: Bachchi Karkaria
[Unknown]: she speaks about
[Unknown]: her story career
[Unknown]: and gives us
[Unknown]: a detailed glimpse
[Unknown]: of these sessions
[Unknown]: at the upcoming
[Unknown]: Times Lit Fest
[Unknown]: on the second
[Unknown]: of December
[Unknown]: we dive into the
[Unknown]: phenomena that is
[Unknown]: superstar Rajini's
[Unknown]: 2.0 and try to
[Unknown]: figure out if it
[Unknown]: lives up to the
[Unknown]: insane hype behind
[Unknown]: it
[Unknown]: on Varda Lab
[Unknown]: Akash and Naveen
[Unknown]: are joined by
[Unknown]: comic and improv
[Unknown]: artist G.S.A.T
[Unknown]: they talk about
[Unknown]: making the comedy
[Unknown]: scenes safer and
[Unknown]: more welcoming
[Unknown]: for new comics
[Unknown]: last week on
[Unknown]: Football Twaddle
[Unknown]: Saru and Varun
[Unknown]: were joined by
[Unknown]: a special guest
[Amit Varma]: former Indian
[Amit Varma]: midfielder Stephen
[Amit Varma]: Dias
[Amit Varma]: he sheds some
[Amit Varma]: light about
[Amit Varma]: his brilliant book
[Amit Varma]: Rebel Sultans
[Amit Varma]: and we left off
[Amit Varma]: when Hassan Gangu
[Amit Varma]: who founded
[Amit Varma]: the Bhamani
[Amit Varma]: Sultanate
[Amit Varma]: came to power
[Amit Varma]: and in 1358
[Amit Varma]: Hassan Gangu
[Amit Varma]: died
[Amit Varma]: he was succeeded
[Amit Varma]: by Mohammad Shah
[Amit Varma]: and then by
[Amit Varma]: Mujahid Shah
[Amit Varma]: and you got a
[Amit Varma]: nice little story
[Amit Varma]: about Mujahid Shah
[Amit Varma]: who when he was
[Amit Varma]: wrestling with
[Amit Varma]: someone as a
[Amit Varma]: teenager
[Amit Varma]: kind of got
[Amit Varma]: carried away
[Guest]: and snapped
[Amit Varma]: his neck
[Amit Varma]: and I presume
[Amit Varma]: he died
[Amit Varma]: that seems to
[Amit Varma]: have been
[Amit Varma]: covered by
[Amit Varma]: his beetle leaf
[Amit Varma]: carrier
[Amit Varma]: the guy who
[Amit Varma]: carried his
[Amit Varma]: paan around
[Guest]: who happened
[Guest]: to be the
[Guest]: son of the
[Guest]: guy whose
[Guest]: neck he had
[Guest]: snapped
[Guest]: yeah
[Guest]: these stories
[Guest]: are you know
[Guest]: it's funny how
[Guest]: these stories
[Guest]: are there
[Guest]: and sometimes
[Guest]: the comedy
[Guest]: gets to you
[Guest]: but it also
[Guest]: tells you so
[Guest]: much about
[Guest]: the past
[Guest]: as the
[Guest]: relating to
[Guest]: the earlier
[Guest]: bizarre cases
[Guest]: bizarre events
[Guest]: bizarre things
[Guest]: happening
[Guest]: a later
[Guest]: Adil Shah
[Guest]: of Bijapur
[Guest]: was murdered
[Guest]: by two
[Guest]: eunuchs
[Guest]: who he had
[Guest]: a certain
[Guest]: soft corner
[Guest]: for
[Guest]: and he's
[Amit Varma]: trying to
[Amit Varma]: seduce them
[Guest]: but they
[Guest]: decided to
[Guest]: slaughter him
[Guest]: you know
[Amit Varma]: another
[Amit Varma]: sultan gets
[Amit Varma]: killed by a
[Amit Varma]: maid
[Amit Varma]: you know
[Amit Varma]: these things
[Amit Varma]: happened all
[Amit Varma]: the time
[Amit Varma]: you know
[Amit Varma]: so
[Amit Varma]: everybody
[Amit Varma]: got what
[Amit Varma]: they
[Amit Varma]: deserved
[Amit Varma]: it's really
[Amit Varma]: entertaining
[Amit Varma]: so anyway
[Amit Varma]: so
[Amit Varma]: you know
[Amit Varma]: the first
[Amit Varma]: fascinating
[Amit Varma]: character
[Amit Varma]: of the
[Amit Varma]: sort of
[Amit Varma]: the
[Amit Varma]: Bahmani
[Amit Varma]: sultans
[Amit Varma]: as I
[Amit Varma]: found it
[Amit Varma]: was
[Amit Varma]: Mohammed
[Amit Varma]: II
[Amit Varma]: who you
[Amit Varma]: describe as
[Amit Varma]: Aristotle
[Guest]: of the
[Guest]: Persian
[Guest]: Renaissance
[Guest]: in general
[Guest]: the Bahmani
[Guest]: sultans did
[Guest]: this
[Guest]: which is that
[Guest]: they realized
[Guest]: that the sea
[Guest]: was their way
[Guest]: of connecting
[Guest]: to this
[Guest]: Persianized
[Guest]: Islamic
[Guest]: culture
[Guest]: because
[Guest]: you could
[Guest]: get poets
[Guest]: get artists
[Guest]: you could
[Guest]: get frankly
[Guest]: you know
[Guest]: what finally
[Guest]: destabilized
[Guest]: the Deccan
[Guest]: was these
[Guest]: internal
[Guest]: dissensions
[Guest]: between
[Guest]: the
[Guest]: Bahmani
[Guest]: sultans
[Guest]: but then
[Guest]: you also
[Guest]: had you
[Guest]: know
[Guest]: as your
[Guest]: power grew
[Guest]: you also
[Guest]: wanted
[Guest]: soft power
[Guest]: and in
[Guest]: those days
[Guest]: soft power
[Guest]: was Persian
[Guest]: if even
[Guest]: Vijayanagar
[Guest]: was imitating
[Guest]: Persian
[Guest]: clothes
[Guest]: you can
[Guest]: imagine
[Guest]: that Persian
[Guest]: culture
[Guest]: was seen
[Guest]: as a
[Guest]: soft power
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: Vijayanagar
[Guest]: was keen
[Guest]: to become
[Guest]: a patron
[Guest]: of the
[Guest]: arts
[Guest]: because
[Guest]: by now
[Guest]: the Bahmani
[Guest]: realm is
[Guest]: solid
[Guest]: you know
[Guest]: the frontiers
[Guest]: are clear
[Guest]: powers in
[Guest]: the hands
[Guest]: of the
[Guest]: family
[Guest]: and then
[Guest]: Feroz Shah
[Guest]: wants to
[Guest]: evolve
[Guest]: a distinct
[Guest]: culture
[Guest]: so on
[Guest]: the one
[Guest]: hand he
[Guest]: wants
[Guest]: a daughter
[Guest]: who
[Guest]: after a
[Guest]: battle
[Guest]: with the
[Guest]: emperor
[Guest]: Vijayanagar
[Guest]: ends up
[Guest]: saying
[Guest]: okay now
[Guest]: we've come
[Guest]: to terms
[Guest]: I want
[Guest]: besides gold
[Guest]: and pearls
[Guest]: and whatever
[Guest]: I want
[Guest]: your daughter
[Guest]: so you
[Guest]: have a
[Guest]: Vijayanagar
[Guest]: princess
[Guest]: marrying
[Guest]: Feroz Shah
[Guest]: Bahmani
[Guest]: and Feroz
[Guest]: Shah
[Guest]: Bahmani
[Guest]: at this
[Guest]: point
[Guest]: he wants
[Guest]: to
[Guest]: consciously
[Guest]: import
[Guest]: into
[Guest]: his capital
[Guest]: and he
[Guest]: becomes
[Guest]: this
[Guest]: very
[Guest]: colorful
[Guest]: figure
[Guest]: with
[Guest]: multiple
[Guest]: wives
[Guest]: each of
[Guest]: them
[Guest]: from
[Amit Varma]: different
[Amit Varma]: regions
[Amit Varma]: he has
[Amit Varma]: almost
[Amit Varma]: like a
[Guest]: collection
[Guest]: of
[Guest]: wives
[Guest]: each
[Guest]: with a
[Guest]: different
[Guest]: name
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: you
[Guest]: know
[Guest]: he
[Guest]: had
[Guest]: this
[Guest]: habit
[Guest]: where
[Guest]: each
[Guest]: wife
[Guest]: was
[Guest]: accommodated
[Guest]: in a
[Guest]: certain
[Guest]: palace
[Guest]: so it
[Guest]: would
[Guest]: be
[Guest]: called
[Guest]: a
[Guest]: mahal
[Guest]: so
[Guest]: if
[Guest]: it
[Guest]: was
[Guest]: an
[Guest]: Arabic
[Guest]: palace
[Guest]: so
[Guest]: he
[Guest]: was
[Guest]: trying
[Guest]: to
[Guest]: consciously
[Guest]: build
[Guest]: up
[Guest]: a
[Guest]: collection
[Guest]: of
[Guest]: wives
[Guest]: and
[Amit Varma]: knowledge
[Amit Varma]: of
[Amit Varma]: languages
[Amit Varma]: and
[Amit Varma]: poets
[Amit Varma]: consciously
[Amit Varma]: present
[Amit Varma]: the
[Amit Varma]: Bahmani
[Amit Varma]: state
[Amit Varma]: as a
[Amit Varma]: global
[Amit Varma]: network
[Amit Varma]: of
[Amit Varma]: all
[Amit Varma]: kinds
[Amit Varma]: of
[Amit Varma]: languages
[Amit Varma]: and
[Amit Varma]: economies
[Amit Varma]: of
[Amit Varma]: all
[Amit Varma]: kinds
[Amit Varma]: of
[Amit Varma]: languages
[Amit Varma]: so
[Amit Varma]: it
[Amit Varma]: would
[Amit Varma]: be
[Amit Varma]: his
[Amit Varma]: duty
[Amit Varma]: to
[Amit Varma]: build
[Amit Varma]: up
[Amit Varma]: a
[Amit Varma]: full
[Amit Varma]: collection
[Amit Varma]: of
[Amit Varma]: wives
[Amit Varma]: and
[Amit Varma]: that
[Amit Varma]: was
[Amit Varma]: his
[Guest]: Because Feroz was trying to get rid of his brother because Feroz wanted his son to succeed
[Guest]: whereas Amit Shah wanted himself to sort of take over after Feroz died.
[Guest]: So when Amit Shah ran away, Feroz sent an army in pursuit and then Amit Shah turns around
[Guest]: and does this little clever thing where you know all sorts of farm animals are lined up
[Guest]: and presented as horses because from the distance everything looks impressive, right?
[Guest]: So all you see is men mounted on animals.
[Guest]: You can't really tell if they're buffalos or bollocks or whatever.
[Guest]: But yeah, in the end that demoralized Feroz's force and he's the one who ended up losing.
[Guest]: And although he died soon after and Amit Shah became king, there's also a long-standing
[Guest]: rumor that Amit Shah actually had Feroz Shah suffocated.
[Guest]: So much for his intellectual activities and his very many wives, he also died a rather
[Guest]: painful death even though it was in bed.
[Amit Varma]: And Amit Shah sort of continued the process of importing foreign cultures and foreign
[Amit Varma]: peoples like you write about how he imported 3,000 archers from Iraq, Khurasan, Transoxania,
[Amit Varma]: Turkey and Arabia.
[Amit Varma]: What's Transoxania?
[Guest]: Sorry.
[Guest]: I'm actually not sure now.
[Guest]: Transoxania is, I think, parts of Central Asia somewhere.
[Amit Varma]: And Khurasan is of course Persia and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And so how does the narrative proceed here?
[Amit Varma]: What are the Bahmanis trying to do?
[Amit Varma]: Like first they come to power, they of course consolidate and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And by the time Feroz Shah has come to power, they have consolidated, which is why Feroz
[Amit Varma]: Shah is sort of looking at his legacy and building up all of this cultural whatever.
[Guest]: Building up cities and now Amit Shah also builds up his own new city.
[Guest]: He moves the capital to Bidar, where simultaneously Bidar was used by various old dynasties, including
[Guest]: the Chalukyas and others.
[Guest]: Does it have a modern name?
[Guest]: Bidar.
[Guest]: Oh, it's still called Bidar.
[Guest]: And so the idea is that he's trying to tap into all that saying that, you know, this
[Guest]: is an old city with very many old links.
[Guest]: I'm sort of channeling that.
[Guest]: But the other thing is also, as I said, these are all military states in the sense that
[Guest]: you have to constantly keep replenishing your military capacity.
[Guest]: For that, this importing from the West became extremely important because the best horses
[Guest]: came from Persia.
[Guest]: Horses do not thrive in India.
[Guest]: And this is why often Vijayanagara was left behind.
[Guest]: And the Vijayanagara emperors always grappled with this internal conundrum, which was that
[Guest]: even though they were bigger, even though they were often wealthier than the Sultans,
[Guest]: they were often defeated on the battlefield simply because they didn't have the latest
[Guest]: artillery technology that the Sultans imported from Turkey.
[Guest]: All the artillerymen were usually Ottomans.
[Guest]: They got their best horses from Persia and they got these soldiers from Persia.
[Guest]: And the thing is, the idea was that by getting these foreigners in, there would be a degree
[Guest]: of loyalty.
[Guest]: They also got Africans, thousands and thousands of Africans who had absolutely no other loyalties.
[Guest]: Their loyalties were only supposed to be to the Sultan.
[Guest]: So being Muslims, the Bhamani Sultans could tap into this Islamic network that brought
[Guest]: them the best of the world at the time.
[Guest]: Best of technology, the best of arms and, you know, ammunition that they needed.
[Guest]: And of course, the best of actual manpower.
[Guest]: Whereas Vijayanagara was a little handicapped there because everything that came to them,
[Guest]: first the Bhamani Sultans would have.
[Guest]: So scholars have found, for example, that Vijayanagara never evolved a fortification
[Guest]: technique like the northern Sultans of the Deccan.
[Guest]: Because the Sultans kept upgrading their forts as, you know, upgradations happened elsewhere
[Guest]: in the world because the Islamic network connected them to that.
[Guest]: Whereas the Vijayanagara emperors never bothered to build up their forts that way, which eventually
[Guest]: they ended up paying a cost for.
[Guest]: So what Ahmed Shah was also doing was this, trying to reinforce on the one hand this link
[Guest]: to Persia to keep the Bhamani Sultanate within that network, on the other hand, trying to
[Guest]: milk that network for whatever it was worth to get the best into his kingdom, whether
[Guest]: it was people or whether it was technology.
[Amit Varma]: And perhaps as a consequence of this, he then ended up defeating Vijayanagara, where he
[Amit Varma]: then destroyed a lot of temples and what you call colleges of Brahmins.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a very funny story about here when the battle is ongoing about how both
[Amit Varma]: the leaders of the forces, Zaria of Vijayanagara and Ahmed Shah himself almost got captured
[Amit Varma]: in battle.
[Guest]: The story about the Raya was quite hilarious.
[Guest]: Yeah, these, I mean, that again, the stories tell you that, you know, battle wasn't one
[Guest]: situation, as cinema shows, you know, everybody meets on a battlefield and clashes, you know,
[Guest]: huge establishments are moving.
[Guest]: Often the largest section of a moving army is the cooks and the cleaners and the prostitutes
[Guest]: and people like that, the bazaar that moves with it.
[Guest]: So you, I had this later quote towards the end in the book about the Marathas and how
[Guest]: towards the end when the Mughals moved, there'd be a soldier, his wife would be with him,
[Guest]: his babies would be with him, the soldier would be carrying things on his head, his
[Guest]: gun would be in the hand of his wife, and she would have stuck some kitchen ladle or
[Guest]: something into the barrel of the gun.
[Guest]: And suddenly out of nowhere, the Marathas will appear on horses, cut off everybody's
[Guest]: head quickly and disappear into the hills.
[Guest]: And before these guys could remove the ladle and start taking aim, they were dead.
[Guest]: So armies on the move were also big establishments that were on the move.
[Guest]: So in these situations, sometimes you have context where say the Raya is sitting somewhere,
[Guest]: his tent is pitched somewhere, ends up being not protected well.
[Guest]: Similarly, in this particular battle, what happens is, on the one hand, Ahmed Shah one
[Guest]: day decides I want to go for a hunt.
[Guest]: So battle is not a one day event, it's a leisurely pace, you know, the king comes slowly, they
[Guest]: set up camp.
[Amit Varma]: It's a marathon not a sprint.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's a very convenient thing.
[Guest]: So he decides, let me go for a hunt, he ends up going too far, and ends up being ambushed
[Guest]: by a set of Vijayanagara people.
[Guest]: And he's chased till he reaches this rather unglamorous situation where this Sultan of
[Guest]: the Bahmanis, you know, king of so many Persians and Africans or whatever, ends up hiding in
[Guest]: a barn.
[Guest]: And he's luckily saved because a number of his own men come to his rescue, but he could
[Guest]: have fallen into Vijayanagara's hands.
[Guest]: Similarly, you have this Vijayanagara emperor, who's reposing somewhere in a field comfortably,
[Guest]: when suddenly he discovers that, you know, these Bahmani troops have come in.
[Guest]: And because he's sitting there in his South Indian clothes, he's not actually dressed
[Guest]: like a king.
[Guest]: He's just wearing a lungi and he's sitting shirtless.
[Amit Varma]: He's nearly naked.
[Guest]: He's nearly naked.
[Guest]: So people think he's a nobody.
[Guest]: He's just some random man who's lying there.
[Guest]: So he gets up and they say, we're now looting the sugarcane field, here, hold these sugarcanes.
[Guest]: And he sort of, the soldiers try and make him their, I don't know, their coolie for
[Guest]: the day.
[Guest]: And he very quietly and cleverly decides not to say that he's actually the emperor on the
[Guest]: other side.
[Guest]: And for some time, he's carrying the sugarcanes with them because they just think he's some
[Guest]: random man.
[Guest]: And of course, then they discover that the main battle has been won.
[Guest]: And now there's gold to be had instead of sugarcane.
[Guest]: So they abandon him and go.
[Guest]: And that's how the Vijayanagara emperor ends up saving himself.
[Guest]: It's the same in the final battle where Vijayanagara falls in 1565 as well, where the Vijayanagara
[Guest]: sultan is in a palanquin or one of those sedan chairs or whatever.
[Guest]: And he ends up in the wrong place where an elephant comes from the other side.
[Guest]: His bearers of his palanquin run away and he's just lying about there.
[Guest]: And then an idiot Brahmin says, no, no, no, don't hurt him.
[Guest]: He's the raya of Vijayanagara.
[Guest]: That's the only reason he was captured.
[Guest]: Otherwise the elephant and the elephant rider would have moved on thinking he was just some
[Guest]: random nobleman.
[Guest]: But because, you know, so these things always happen in battle, these comical, somewhat,
[Guest]: you know, unglamorous, unheroic situations.
[Amit Varma]: Really comic, almost lapstick situations.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, I mean, I'm a proponent of the keto diet, I often say sugar is poison.
[Amit Varma]: So you could argue that by carrying sugarcane for the...
[Amit Varma]: You say that as we sip coca-cola here.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, Diet Coke.
[Amit Varma]: No sugar is written here.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, so when the raya was carrying sugarcane for the enemy, he was in a sense
[Amit Varma]: contributing to the eventual downfall.
[Amit Varma]: What's also interesting here is, you know, people often paint, you know, Vijayanagara
[Amit Varma]: as a Hindu empire.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, it might seem that, okay, they're fighting the sultans, the Bahmani empire,
[Amit Varma]: and therefore it's a Hindu versus Muslim thing.
[Amit Varma]: And you point out here that Amit Shah, on the one hand, yes, whenever he captured 20,000
[Amit Varma]: Hindus, he held a feast, for example, which is an interesting factoid.
[Guest]: And one wonders, it's a doubtful claim, not captured, killed.
[Guest]: The idea is that every time he killed 20,000 Hindus, he would hold a feast.
[Guest]: Now it's simply improbable, because, you know, if he was killing 20,000 Hindus on such a
[Guest]: regular basis, Vijayanagara would have collapsed, because we don't know the exact population
[Guest]: figures.
[Guest]: But we do know from global population trends, etc, that that sort of slaughter is impossible.
[Guest]: Because Vijayanagara went on to have a great golden age after this, although, of course,
[Guest]: golden age is not a concept historians sort of, but the idea is that Vijayanagara grew
[Guest]: after that.
[Guest]: It would not have been possible if 20,000 people were being slaughtered on a daily basis.
[Amit Varma]: But the point you sort of make here is that even though this sort of sentiment was there,
[Amit Varma]: he was he's actually celebrated in the South by Hindus even today.
[Guest]: So that's what I'm saying.
[Guest]: So his own chroniclers will say, oh, yes, he killed 20,000 individuals on a daily basis.
[Guest]: It's an exaggeration.
[Guest]: The idea is that, yes, he killed a large number of people in the course of these conquests.
[Guest]: But in reality, you know, he's he's worshipped by Hindus, the Lingayats come to his tomb
[Guest]: every year, and they perform on his birth anniversary, a certain ritual where they smash the coconut
[Guest]: and they do everything in a Hindu way.
[Guest]: And he was a great patron of Sufis and others.
[Guest]: And this is the complexity that the Deccan highlights, which is that this binary Hindu
[Guest]: Muslim divide does not quite work.
[Guest]: There's Vijayanagara, for example, on the one hand, as I said, they already called themselves
[Guest]: sultans because they are no Kwams appropriating an Islamic title and using it for themselves.
[Guest]: They often, you know, there's one sultan later in the Adil Shahi kingdom, which is one of
[Guest]: the Bahmani successor states, where one sultan dismisses 3000 Persian soldiers and warriors
[Guest]: he has.
[Guest]: Where did they go?
[Guest]: They trot down all the way to the south and seek service in Vijayanagara.
[Guest]: Vijayanagara had its own Muslims, it had its own mosques at one point.
[Guest]: The last emperor of Vijayanagara even allowed the eating of beef because he didn't want
[Guest]: to.
[Guest]: Similarly, the Quran was always placed in court because the Muslim soldiers said they
[Guest]: couldn't bow before a Hindu or any other human being as such.
[Guest]: Therefore, they would bow in front of the Quran instead.
[Amit Varma]: And the Quran was behind his throne.
[Guest]: The Quran was kept near the throne so that, you know, they wouldn't be awkward about bowing
[Guest]: in front of him.
[Guest]: So the idea was that it was much more complicated.
[Guest]: It's encapsulated best in the 1565 battle of Talikota, which is where Vijayanagara is
[Guest]: finally, the city falls and the empire starts disintegrating and the sultans of the Deccan
[Guest]: take over and start, you know, really win that historic battle.
[Guest]: What's interesting is most of the, especially right-wing historians and the Twitter school
[Guest]: of history, which is the screenshot school of history, they say, oh, this is a Hindu
[Guest]: empire being destroyed by these Muslim sultans.
[Guest]: Complicated history here, because what happens is the emperor of Vijayanagara, who's leading
[Guest]: the Vijayanagara forces, he began his career in the court of the Qutub Shah of Golconda.
[Guest]: He was a nobleman of a Muslim sultan.
[Guest]: He only ended up becoming emperor of Vijayanagara because he married Krishnadevaraya's daughter.
[Guest]: The Qutub Shah who was fighting at that battle, he lived seven years as a teenager from the
[Guest]: age of about 15 or something till, you know, his early 20s in Vijayanagara, where he Teluguized
[Guest]: his name from Ibrahim to Abhirama.
[Guest]: He came back to Golconda eventually, patronized poetry on the Mahabharata, acquired a wife
[Guest]: who was of Vijayanagara origin.
[Guest]: He spoke and he's a great patron of Telugu.
[Guest]: Look at the way poets moved.
[Guest]: A poet like Shetrayya could compose poetry not only in Madurai and Hindu courts, but
[Guest]: also for the Qutub Shah of Golconda, he composed 1500 Padams, because the Qutub Shah saw themselves
[Guest]: also as custodians of Telugu heritage.
[Guest]: Similarly, at the 1565 battle, you have 6000 Marathas, but they're fighting for the sultans.
[Guest]: You have one Muslim warrior called Ainulmul Gilani.
[Guest]: He's fighting on the side of the Vijayanagara emperor.
[Guest]: Now the Twitter school, they pulled out screenshots from recent books that say, oh, Ainulmul
[Guest]: Gilani, you know, defected and went over to the side of the sultans before the battle
[Guest]: ended.
[Guest]: There's no evidence of this.
[Guest]: I don't know where the stories come from, because the only inscriptional evidence of
[Guest]: Ainulmul Gilani is where he's called in Telugu Ainumuluka, and he's recorded as giving a
[Guest]: grant of land to 80 Brahmins.
[Guest]: So it's very mixed up.
[Guest]: You can't conveniently make any black and white categorizations.
[Guest]: Even the Sultanates themselves, the Nizam Shahs of Ahmednagar were descended from a
[Guest]: converted Brahmin, and they actually kept links with their Brahmin relatives.
[Guest]: They made grants of land to their Brahmin relatives.
[Guest]: They gave estates to their Brahmin relatives.
[Guest]: They married Persian women.
[Guest]: The Adil Shah of Bijapur, the Adil Shahi dynasty was founded by a man called Yusuf, who got
[Guest]: on a boat from Persia to build a career in India.
[Guest]: Somewhere on the way, he decided, I'm going to start claiming I'm a long lost son of the
[Guest]: Ottoman emperor.
[Guest]: Comes here, marries a Maratha woman, and that's how the Adil Shahi dynasty is founded.
[Guest]: So where people say, oh, the Adil Shahs are Muslims, you're completely forgetting the
[Guest]: mother, the founding lady, who's a Maratha woman.
[Guest]: And this Maratha woman is very important because two generations down the line, when her legitimate
[Guest]: grandson proves to be not up to the mark, she has no issues blinding him, putting him
[Guest]: to the side and having an illegitimate grandson elevated to power.
[Guest]: So she was not a docile lady sitting wrapped up in some corner.
[Guest]: She was a political actor herself.
[Guest]: And different Adil Shahs sometimes highlighted different sides of their heritage.
[Guest]: So the second Adil Shah was very Persianized.
[Guest]: He preferred Persian.
[Guest]: He spoke only Persian.
[Guest]: He dressed his troops in Persian uniforms.
[Guest]: But then you have someone like Ibrahim Adil Shah II, who was a contemporary of Akbar and
[Guest]: Jahangir, who is exactly the opposite, where the Mughal envoy finds that barely he doesn't
[Guest]: like speaking Persian.
[Guest]: He speaks Marathi.
[Guest]: He prefers Marathi.
[Guest]: He was Sunni Muslim, but he wore the Rudraksh mala, painted his nails red and called himself
[Guest]: the son of Guru Ganapati and the pure Saraswati.
[Guest]: He was so besotted with Saraswati that he went on to rename his capital from Bijapur
[Guest]: to Vidyapur.
[Guest]: So again, he's a Sunni Muslim, but he has these other sides to his identity as well.
[Guest]: Just as Akbar established Fatehpur Sikri for his great debates with various religious experts
[Guest]: from other religions, Ibrahim Adil Shah II had his Noraspur, where Jesuits and Shaivites
[Guest]: and everybody could come and discuss religion with him.
[Guest]: When a trader comes to see him, he finds the Adil Shah surrounded by 500 bejeweled women,
[Guest]: all of them playing the Veena, because he loved Veena music, you know.
[Guest]: So the man is very colorful.
[Guest]: He's very interesting like this.
[Guest]: So you have the option of looking at him as, oh, Ibrahim equal to Sunni Muslim Sultan.
[Guest]: But wasn't he a little bit more than that, to the extent that when he died on his tomb,
[Guest]: you have a very clever inscription that says, it's actually a quote from the Quran, which
[Guest]: says, no, Ibrahim was not a Jew.
[Guest]: He was not a Christian.
[Guest]: Certainly he was not an idolater, that is a Hindu.
[Guest]: He was a devout Muslim.
[Guest]: It's almost like he's teasing everybody in a sense of saying that none of you can figure
[Guest]: out who I was, you know, what my religious identity was.
[Guest]: So I just put it here on the inscription.
[Guest]: But the funny thing is, although it says Ibrahim there, there also he's playing a little bit
[Guest]: of a, there's a little bit of wordplay there because it could either refer to him or it
[Guest]: could refer to Ibrahim from the Quran.
[Guest]: So you can't really tell what his final loyalties were, whether he was part Hindu, part Muslim
[Guest]: or both.
[Amit Varma]: He had no contradiction there.
[Amit Varma]: And when I was reading your book, you know, two of the fascinating themes that kind of
[Amit Varma]: stood out for me were globalization and assimilation.
[Amit Varma]: So on the one hand, you have this kind of globalization where you have, say, the soft
[Amit Varma]: power of the Persians being imported and you see an influence of that in clothes, in food,
[Amit Varma]: in architecture.
[Amit Varma]: For example, to quote you again, you write about how Amit Shah started a new style of
[Amit Varma]: architecture, quote, with the elegance of Iran, the sensuality of South India, even
[Amit Varma]: the occasional influence from Europe.
[Guest]: Even Vijayanagar, the so-called elephant stables, the domes, domes are not a South Indian architectural
[Amit Varma]: style.
[Amit Varma]: They're borrowed very clearly from Islam.
[Amit Varma]: So on the one hand, you have influences from across the world, from Europe, from Africa,
[Amit Varma]: from the Middle East flooding in.
[Amit Varma]: And on the other hand, you also have a remarkable assimilation to the extent of, you know, all
[Amit Varma]: the things you pointed out that you have these rebel sultans knowing all the local languages,
[Amit Varma]: marrying local women, adapting to local cultures.
[Amit Varma]: And this is happening back then before there are, you know, regular flights between these
[Amit Varma]: two places or YouTube, where you can actually immerse yourself more in the culture.
[Amit Varma]: And it's sort of a reminder of how even in our current day, we might be like so sure
[Amit Varma]: of what our cultural identity is, but actually it's a blend of just about everything.
[Guest]: It always is a blend.
[Guest]: Globalization may be a new word that is in fashion now, but the phenomenon has existed
[Guest]: always.
[Guest]: It may not have been as fast and instant as it is today, because there was no internet
[Guest]: and quick communication and travel, but it existed.
[Guest]: People always communicated with other cultures and peoples.
[Guest]: They had no issues absorbing from there.
[Guest]: Look at some of the names around us now, everybody, you know, recently there was this thing about
[Guest]: Amit Shah's name, Shah, being a Persian thing.
[Guest]: Now, of course, in Amit Shah's case, it could have been, I mean, there is a theory that
[Guest]: it's Sahoo that becomes Shah, but even then Shah is a Persian pronunciation.
[Guest]: So even if Sahoo adopted Shah, there's a Persian influence there, but forget the Shah because
[Amit Varma]: that's unsettled.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, even the clothes Amit Shah and Narendra Modi wear, the churidar kurta, I mean, that's
[Guest]: classically Islamic.
[Guest]: Look at some of the Peshwas who succeeded the actual Maratha rulers and became the real
[Guest]: force in the Deccan afterwards.
[Guest]: The Peshwa, the title itself is Persian.
[Guest]: It means minister.
[Guest]: It's a Persian title.
[Guest]: Devendra Fadnavis is the current chief minister of Maharashtra.
[Guest]: What is Fadnavis?
[Guest]: It's a Persian title.
[Guest]: So these things are not gone.
[Guest]: I'm not talking about a time that's no, that's left no traces.
[Guest]: The traces are still in front of us.
[Guest]: These traces still exist.
[Guest]: Shivaji himself referred to the Hindu path, Patshahi.
[Guest]: What is a Patshahi?
[Guest]: It's derived from Batsha.
[Guest]: It's again an Islamic influence.
[Guest]: Look at all the clothes that Shivaji and his contemporaries wore, again, inspired by Islamic
[Guest]: fashions.
[Guest]: Speaking of Shivaji, you know, Shivaji's father was a man called Shahji.
[Guest]: Now his grandfather, who was a close associate of the Nizam Shah of Ahmednagar, Maloji, Maloji
[Guest]: couldn't have sons for a long time.
[Guest]: So Maloji goes to a holy man and the holy man blesses him and his wife and then eventually
[Guest]: he has two sons.
[Guest]: Interestingly, the name of the holy man is Shah Sharif.
[Guest]: He's a Muslim holy man.
[Guest]: And what does Maloji name his sons?
[Guest]: Shahji and Sharifji.
[Guest]: This is Shivaji's father and uncle.
[Guest]: If you go to Ellora, where Maloji's Samadhi exists, you know, one scholar, the controversial
[Guest]: James Lane, has made the mistake of saying that this is a tomb where Maloji is buried.
[Guest]: It's not a tomb.
[Guest]: It's a Samadhi.
[Guest]: But the reason James Lane made the mistake is because if you go to the Samadhi, it looks
[Guest]: like an Islamic monument.
[Guest]: It looks exactly like the tombs you'll find in Golconda and other places.
[Guest]: It's got that Islamic structure with some Hindu influences in terms of the ornamental
[Guest]: activities but the dome, all of that, if you look at it in one glance, it looks like an
[Guest]: Islamic structure.
[Guest]: But whose Samadhi is it?
[Guest]: Shivaji's grandfather.
[Guest]: Shivaji himself commissioned a Sanskrit poem called the Shivabharata, the Nizam Shah in
[Guest]: one place.
[Guest]: Here you see the contradiction emerging, which is that on the one hand, Shivaji claims this
[Guest]: is Vishnu reincarnated to deliver the world from the oppressions of the Turukas, the Muslim
[Guest]: kings.
[Guest]: But on the other hand, it also refers to the Nizam Shah of Ahmednagar as a dharmatma.
[Guest]: It also refers to the famous African warrior general Malik Ambar as brave as the sun.
[Guest]: At one point, Malik Ambar is compared to the Hindu god Kartikeya.
[Guest]: So the idea is that even then, there was this black and whiting of history was very complicated.
[Guest]: You couldn't do it very easily.
[Guest]: And even Shivaji himself recognized it.
[Guest]: And the Shivabharata is a fascinating case and example.
[Guest]: And Malik Ambar is an even more fascinating case because this, we've discussed the Persian
[Guest]: influence.
[Guest]: We've discussed the Marathas.
[Guest]: We've discussed the Hindu blend with all of this.
[Guest]: But the other element in the Deccan was the Africans, which is that thousands and thousands
[Guest]: of Africans came as military slaves to the Deccan year after year.
[Guest]: And this wasn't merely to the Deccan.
[Guest]: In the 1200s, in Razia Sultan's time, one of the reasons she was assassinated in Delhi
[Guest]: was because she had an Abyssinian, an Ethiopian African lover.
[Guest]: In Bengal, there was a brief Habshi dynasty, which is African slaves kicking out the ruling
[Guest]: dynasty and seizing power for less than a decade.
[Guest]: But it existed in Bengal.
[Guest]: In Uttar Pradesh, an African eunuch founded in Jaunpur, a dynasty that lasted for a while,
[Guest]: I think, in the 14th century.
[Guest]: So Africans were always in India.
[Guest]: As late as 1724, the Mysore Maharaja had an African guarding one of his forts.
[Guest]: The Nizam of Hyderabad and 19th century Africans, but the Deccan, it achieves an even more special
[Guest]: place because at least two Sultans had African wives.
[Guest]: That is, picture this, in present day Ahmednagar, which is a tier two town in Maharashtra now,
[Guest]: there were African queens, two of them in the late 16th century and early 17th century.
[Guest]: One of them was a daughter of Malik Ambar, who began life as a young boy in the Oromo
[Guest]: tribe in Ethiopia, gets enslaved when he's about 10-12 years old, gets carted off to
[Guest]: Baghdad, at some point ends up in the Deccan where he's purchased by the Peshwa of Ahmednagar,
[Guest]: who is the Peshwa also a black man, who has a thousand other black people he's purchased.
[Guest]: Malik Ambar then rises slowly, ends up having a small little mercenary force.
[Guest]: And finally, by the end of the 1500s, he becomes the main man standing between the Mughals
[Guest]: and the conquest of the Deccan.
[Guest]: So several generations before Shivaji, with Shivaji's grandfather as one of his right
[Guest]: hand men, it was this African man who had adopted India as his home, become a Muslim,
[Guest]: who was the main problem for the Mughals in terms of conquering the Deccan.
[Guest]: Jahangir, if you read the Jahangir Nama, it's quite fascinating, Jahangir is constantly
[Guest]: bitching and hating on this man.
[Guest]: He calls him Ambar the ill-starred, Ambar the black-faced, Ambar that disastrous man,
[Guest]: because he can't conquer this man, Ambar is too clever.
[Guest]: And Ambar is the one who develops what is called Bargigiri, guerrilla warfare, which
[Guest]: is what Shivaji then takes to perfection a few generations later.
[Guest]: And Shivaji therefore, as I said, describes Ambar as brave as the sun in his own Shiva
[Guest]: Bharata, because Ambar was a legend, he was a remarkable man.
[Guest]: Jahangir was so frustrated with Ambar and his inability to conquer and reduce Ambar
[Guest]: to nothing, that he commissioned a painting which shows Jahangir shooting an arrow at
[Guest]: Ambar's severed head, impaled on a spear.
[Guest]: It was something Jahangir never managed to do in real life.
[Guest]: But he fantasized in art what he couldn't achieve in real life.
[Guest]: And Ambar, as it happened, died a very old man in his 80s, comfortable and secure in
[Guest]: his fortress, undefeated by the Mughals.
[Guest]: So the Deccan was a place where not only Persians, Marathas, Vijayanagar existed, but also thousands
[Guest]: of Africans who came in.
[Guest]: All of them left their marks on this place.
[Guest]: And many of these people married Maratha women, and many of their descendants would have been
[Guest]: absorbed into the community.
[Guest]: So it's a mix of all these, not only cultural influences, but also blood from so many places.
[Amit Varma]: And many of us are probably descended from Africans in a more immediate sense than we
[Amit Varma]: think.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, I think so.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And just tangential question that occurs to me, how would Shivaji have known about Malik
[Amit Varma]: Ambar?
[Amit Varma]: Because you don't have history books, you don't have podcasts, you don't have YouTube.
[Guest]: I mean, family tradition, as I said, Shivaji's father knew Ambar, Shivaji's grandfather was
[Amit Varma]: a priest.
[Guest]: So it's all oral traditions.
[Guest]: It's only two generations.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: When your grandfather is closely associated with him, and you commission this.
[Guest]: So Ambar dies in the late 1620s.
[Guest]: And in the 1680s, Shivaji, several decades later, Shivaji commissions the Shivabharata.
[Guest]: Why is Ambar compared to Kartikeya?
[Guest]: Because Ambar's memory and his legacy is still standing tall.
[Guest]: That's something that clearly inspired Shivaji, for Shivaji to give Ambar such prominence
[Guest]: in the Shivabharata, which is otherwise a work of eulogy for Shivaji himself.
[Guest]: It's a Sanskrit poem that talks about Shivaji's conquests and adventures.
[Amit Varma]: But Ambar is a very prominent figure there.
[Amit Varma]: So let's kind of head back now to the Bahmanis again and trace, go all the way to how they
[Amit Varma]: fell.
[Amit Varma]: You talk about like, another bit that fascinated me was the grandsons of Amritsar, Humayun
[Amit Varma]: the cruel and Hassan.
[Amit Varma]: And you write about how Hassan was made the Sultan, and then the paying crowds gathered
[Amit Varma]: outside Humayun's palace waiting to sort of plunder it.
[Amit Varma]: And then he managed to get out of that and he took power from Hassan and then, quote,
[Guest]: And he did it very cleverly, he didn't have men with him.
[Guest]: So what did he do?
[Guest]: He got a holy man to come and stand next to him, because that's a different kind of legitimacy.
[Guest]: And then this crowd sort of backed off when they saw the holy man.
[Guest]: And then he walks all the way to Hassan, who's sitting in the darbar on the throne, walks
[Guest]: up to him, slaps him, pushes him off the throne and takes a seat on the throne.
[Guest]: This is so hilarious to just picture the scene.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and then a little Hassan and then you say, quote, Humayun had, quote, Hassan thrown
[Amit Varma]: before tigers, ordered some of his adherents to be cast into cauldrons full of boiling
[Amit Varma]: water and oil and release mad elephants and other wild bees to prey upon the unfortunate
[Guest]: victims.
[Guest]: Stop, quote.
[Guest]: Yeah, again, as I said, violence displayed and violence used in a very visually ghastly
[Guest]: fashion just to sort of reinforce the idea that don't mess with me.
[Amit Varma]: And why mad elephants?
[Guest]: You mentioned mad elephants, like multiple times, they appear in the sources.
[Guest]: I think mad in the sense that, you know, very aggressive sort of elephants, which will come
[Guest]: and sort of destroy you no matter what.
[Guest]: Otherwise, elephants, if it's a regular elephant that's standing there, why would it come and
[Guest]: trample you?
[Guest]: You know, so if it has to be done with as much brutality as possible, you need an elephant
[Guest]: that's really got something going for it.
[Amit Varma]: Pissed off, unfed, made to, and then you talk about how Humayun the cruel was stabbed by
[Amit Varma]: a maidservant, which is also an ignominious way to die, I suppose, for a guy like that.
[Guest]: How did the Bamani Empire come to an end?
[Guest]: The Bamani Empire came to an end because of the weight of its own internal contradictions.
[Guest]: As I said, at the height of its confidence, absorbing, say, you know, a lot of Persians,
[Guest]: absorbing the local Maratha element, absorbing culture from Vijayanagara, all that is possible.
[Amit Varma]: And also the Dakhnis, like you pointed out, are basically, they've come from the Turks
[Guest]: and they're Sunni Muslims.
[Guest]: They're either people who come from the north, but they're essentially Indian in the sense
[Guest]: that largely the Dakhnis are Sunni Muslims, they're people who've converted within India
[Guest]: and they're considered Hindustani Muslims, whereas the Westerners or the Afakhis, they
[Guest]: are Shias, largely, who've come in from Persia later.
[Guest]: And the thing is, the Westerners have a little bit of a superiority complex in the Bamani
[Guest]: court, because as I said, there's this Persian, Persian is considered the latest soft power
[Guest]: asset.
[Guest]: It's very glamorous, etc. compared to which the Dakhnis look a little bit like poor cousins.
[Guest]: So there's that internal sort of rivalry there.
[Amit Varma]: And would it be correct to say that the language also plays a part?
[Guest]: So the Persian at that time is like the English of today, the elite speaker.
[Guest]: In fact, Persian was a Persian was diplomatic language till the early 19th century.
[Guest]: And I was stunned when I was working on my first book, letters written by the Maharani
[Guest]: of Travancore in the 1810s to the British governor, they're in Persian.
[Guest]: It wasn't even in English, it was in Persian, because even the British recognized Persian
[Guest]: as the international language in this part of the world.
[Guest]: And Persian had therefore great value attached to it.
[Guest]: So therefore, the Persian faction was very influential.
[Guest]: So you have the Persian faction, you have the Dakhni faction, you have the Marathas,
[Guest]: you have the Africans, all of these are groups.
[Guest]: So in the end, the contradiction was that if it was a sultan who was confident and broadminded
[Guest]: enough, he was able to take all these people along with him, he could inspire that confidence.
[Guest]: But some sultans made the mistake of playing these groups against each other.
[Guest]: So as political power started weakening a little bit, they started being tempted to
[Guest]: play one group against the other for their own benefit.
[Guest]: So this led to violence between these groups, and slowly the differences started solidifying.
[Guest]: And you know, as I said, this was a military state, and these borders and loyalties are
[Guest]: not constant.
[Guest]: You can easily, you know, one entire group can remove themselves from this court and
[Guest]: find patronage in the next court.
[Guest]: So in that sense, and different sultans, so within the Bahmani state, by the end of their
[Guest]: days of glory, as it were, what you have is a weak sultan who doesn't, who can't hold
[Guest]: all these factions together, and powerful governors.
[Guest]: So the Nizam Shah is converted from a Dakhni, which is a converted Brahmin, and they're
[Guest]: the first ones to establish an independent kingdom and found the city of Ahmednagar and
[Guest]: so on.
[Guest]: And they become an independent kingdom.
[Guest]: Technically, the Bahmani sultan is maintained for another 40-45 years.
[Guest]: But slowly the power, they're just a cipher, the final Bahmani sultans are reduced to picking
[Guest]: out the jewels from their crown and selling it, and then picking out things from their
[Guest]: throne and selling it because they have no money.
[Guest]: Then you have the Adil Shah who realizes, hold on, the kingdom is falling to bits, let
[Guest]: me also sort of consolidate my little corner somewhere.
[Amit Varma]: That's Bijapur, basically.
[Amit Varma]: Bijapur.
[Guest]: The Qutub Shah of Golconda does the same in Golconda.
[Guest]: Although he never proclaims independence, he still carves out his own independent realm.
[Guest]: And you know, he sends a tribute annually to the sultan, but then when that particular
[Guest]: sultan dies, he stops.
[Guest]: So eventually the sultans are left with nothing.
[Guest]: And the last, it's quite tragic, the last descendant of the Bahmani sultans at the end
[Guest]: of the 1530s is reduced to getting on a ship and going off to Mecca because he has nothing
[Guest]: left here.
[Guest]: He's nobody.
[Guest]: So the Bahmani sultanate essentially disintegrates.
[Guest]: Why do I call them rebel sultans?
[Guest]: Because the Bahmani sultanate was established by a set of people in rebellion from Delhi
[Guest]: and it was destabilized by another set of rebels who sort of rebelled against the Bahmani
[Guest]: sultan, founded their own kingdoms and they were the next generation of rebel sultans
[Guest]: as it were.
[Guest]: So for about 150 years, the Bahmanis are in charge.
[Guest]: Then you have a second cycle which ends in the late 17th century when successive states
[Guest]: come into the picture and the Bahmani sultanate disintegrates into five smaller kingdoms.
[Amit Varma]: But each of them very powerful and strong.
[Amit Varma]: And it's also interesting how sort of that dynasty, the Bahmani dynasty sort of whimpers
[Amit Varma]: out like the Mughals do almost.
[Amit Varma]: You know, it's not like someone beheaded and you become a non-entity.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you just become absolutely nobody.
[Amit Varma]: Let's, you know, now before we talk about those sort of rebel sultans who succeed the
[Amit Varma]: Bahmani empire, let's talk a bit about Vijayanagara.
[Amit Varma]: Bring me up to speed.
[Guest]: Vijayanagara is going through its own internal issues, which is that unlike the Bahmani state
[Guest]: which was disintegrated into several pieces, Vijayanagara, you have three dynasties that
[Guest]: come and fall.
[Guest]: So first you have the original dynasty, the Sangama brothers who found Vijayanagara.
[Guest]: They rule for a certain time.
[Guest]: Then you have a short-lived dynasty in the middle, which is a military general who takes
[Guest]: over and then his son, he dies, his son is sort of kicked out.
[Guest]: And then finally, Krishnadevaraya's dynasty comes to power.
[Guest]: And if the initial ones founded the kingdom, and I think they were largely Shaivites, Krishnadevaraya's
[Guest]: time is you start seeing more of a Vaishnava influence.
[Guest]: And Vijayanagara at this time, again, as I said, is absorbing all these influences.
[Guest]: It's expanding its boundaries in the south, failing frustratingly when it comes to the
[Guest]: sultans because the sultans have more technology as far as Vijayanagara is concerned.
[Guest]: And at certain times, the Vijayanagara kings have to pay tribute to the sultans.
[Guest]: Sometimes the sultans have to come and enforce it, but they have to end up paying tribute.
[Guest]: Interestingly, after the splinter states come to power in the northern deck and the Adil
[Guest]: Shahs of Bijapur, the Qutub Shahs in Golconda and the Nizam Shahs in Ahmednagar, Vijayanagara
[Guest]: then has greater influence because Vijayanagara is still solid.
[Guest]: It's still one big empire.
[Guest]: And then the last, the mistake was that the last emperor of Vijayanagara, and when I say
[Guest]: last, Vijayanagara survived, but the last main character before the historic battle
[Guest]: of Talikota in 1565, he starts meddling a little too much in these northern kingdoms.
[Guest]: Now, again, there's no Hindu-Muslim divide here.
[Guest]: So one of the Adil Shahs of Bijapur was adopted by this last emperor of Vijayanagara as his
[Guest]: own son.
[Guest]: As I said, the Qutub Shah, when he had no place in his brother's court, he came and
[Guest]: lived in exile in Vijayanagara.
[Guest]: There are lots of continuities and commonalities between them, but Vijayanagara starts getting
[Guest]: tempted a little too much to start playing politics with these people.
[Guest]: And these northern kings realized that, hold on, we're all losing and Vijayanagara is slowly
[Guest]: gaining at our expense.
[Guest]: So finally, for the one time in history where their survival was threatened, they come together.
[Guest]: And of course, this is justified in the name of Islam and all of that, but that's not the
[Guest]: point.
[Guest]: The point is politics.
[Guest]: They come together, they decide this is a common enemy.
[Guest]: We may all hate each other, but for the time being, this is our biggest threat.
[Guest]: So, they come to a series of marital alliances where, say, one of the Nizam Shahi princesses,
[Guest]: the famous Chand Bibi, is given in marriage to the Adil Shah.
[Guest]: Another daughter of the Nizam Shah goes off to the Qutub Shah family.
[Guest]: Similarly, girls are exchanged from those families and they have a new alliance.
[Guest]: And that's when Vijayanagara is finally destroyed in that historic battle in Talikota and the
[Guest]: city is sacked and taken.
[Guest]: Interestingly, the Sultans don't go out and try and conquer all of Vijayanagara.
[Guest]: Once the city is destroyed, they go back to their capitals.
[Guest]: They gain some territory, but they're not trying to completely, you know, wipe out Vijayanagara
[Guest]: from the map of India.
[Guest]: That's not happening.
[Guest]: Vijayanagara is still seen as a legitimate entity.
[Guest]: And you see some of this in the texts as well, where there's this later text called the Rayavachakamu,
[Guest]: where also you find some Hindu-Muslim polemics, the early beginnings of a certain polemical
[Guest]: line that starts occurring at this time, where it's written after Krishnadevaraya's time,
[Guest]: 70-80 years later, but it talks about how, it says how all the Sultans of the Deccan
[Guest]: are evil, men are being cut into half in the streets, they're all greedy, their own ministers
[Guest]: are scared of them.
[Guest]: Basically, it's compared to the land of death, the Yama's kingdom.
[Guest]: That's how bad the Deccan Sultans are.
[Guest]: Some people interpret this thing, say all these Muslims are so bad and the Hindus are
[Guest]: clearly saying this is bad.
[Guest]: But the same Rayavachakamu also says the Mughal Emperor is great.
[Guest]: It says the Mughal Emperor is blessed by Kashi Vishwanath.
[Guest]: So just as Vijayanagara is blessed by Tirupati, the Gajapati of Orissa is blessed by Jagannath
[Guest]: of Puri, the Mughals are blessed by Kashi Vishwanath.
[Guest]: So they recognized to make the Deccan Sultans look bad, they play up the Mughals and make
[Guest]: the Mughals look good.
[Guest]: So again, Vijayanagara wasn't playing a Hindu-Muslim game.
[Guest]: If they were, Bukka, one of the founders of Vijayanagara, who claimed in his inscriptions
[Guest]: to be Krishna reborn to destroy the Mlecchas, which is the Muslims, he had no issues trying
[Guest]: to seek an alliance with Feroz Shah Bahmani, saying, okay, you and I'll join hands together
[Guest]: and I'll come from the south, you come from the north and we'll destroy the Bahmani Sultanate
[Guest]: in the center.
[Guest]: So again, politics is what guides it.
[Guest]: But Vijayanagara, of course, has its own issues.
[Guest]: You have these coups that are happening in Vijayanagara and so on.
[Guest]: But finally, of course, it was overstretched, where the last emperor of Vijayanagara played,
[Guest]: he tried to gamble in a way that didn't quite work out in the way he thought.
[Guest]: And the Sultanate, instead of breaking away and his divine rule succeeding, they instead
[Guest]: united and they decided to teach Vijayanagara a lesson.
[Amit Varma]: And I think this was partly because, like you point out in the book, he got incredibly
[Amit Varma]: arrogant, he humiliated the Nizam Shah more than he should have in a particular instance.
[Amit Varma]: And then despite allying with the others to fight with the Nizam Shah, he annexed part
[Amit Varma]: of the kingdoms and destroyed mosques, destroyed mosques and all annexations would be accompanied
[Amit Varma]: by the destruction of mosques and the humiliation of women and there's an interesting legend,
[Guest]: which is actually a footnote in the book, which is Chand Bibi's mother, Khunza Humayun,
[Guest]: which is Hussain Nizam Shah, the one who's at this battle, his wife.
[Guest]: The story goes that, this is from one particular poem from the Ahmednagar court, where Ramaraya,
[Guest]: the emperor of Vijayanagara demands tribute from Ahmednagar.
[Guest]: And in the list of things that the Nizam Shah should pay, there is a sexually loaded reference
[Guest]: to Khunza Humayun, the Begum's anklets, saying that, you know, the tribute includes the Begum's
[Guest]: anklets and Hussain Nizam Shah says, no, I will avenge her honor or whatever.
[Guest]: Again, it's an excuse to justify what was geopolitics.
[Guest]: They essentially wanted to destroy each other anyway.
[Guest]: But it's interesting that a woman appears here at this particular time.
[Guest]: And as it happens, Khunza Humayun is one of those few women that appears in the history
[Guest]: of the Deccan as a political figure.
[Guest]: And of course, she rules for six years after her husband dies, but then her son and his
[Guest]: coterie eventually topple her and imprison her and sort of wipe her out to the extent
[Guest]: that she's not only wiped out of records, she's painted over in paintings, she's reduced
[Guest]: to this giant blot in paintings where her husband still remains intact, but she's been
[Guest]: reduced to a smudge in these miniature paintings.
[Amit Varma]: Which brings me down to a question I plan to ask at the end of this, but before we get
[Amit Varma]: back to the narrative, just to take it up, and you'd mentioned this yourself before is
[Amit Varma]: how women are viewed in history and how their roles are recorded in history.
[Guest]: It's complicated because, you know, the further back you go in time, you find that most of
[Guest]: the material is authored by men, which means there's that male gaze.
[Guest]: It's largely about men and their battles.
[Guest]: There are women here and there occasionally, but the voices that tell their story are still
[Guest]: not female voices.
[Guest]: They are men who often have their own prejudices, their own biases.
[Guest]: They often don't approve of these autonomous, strong women.
[Guest]: So Kunza Humayun, as I was mentioning, she ended up rotting in jail for some 15, 16 years
[Guest]: before she died.
[Guest]: She was wiped out.
[Guest]: She was, there was no glory for her.
[Guest]: Her daughter, Chand Bibi survives a little bit in legend and popular imagination, partly
[Guest]: because Chand Bibi died in the course of the Mughal invasion and she died, she was assassinated.
[Guest]: So that tragedy therefore allowed her to be enshrined as a sort of martyr.
[Amit Varma]: Before that, she also kind of fought a famous battle, almost taking a man's role and going
[Guest]: out into the ramparts.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: When the Mughals breached the fort, she actually went into the breach and ensured it was reconstructed
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: So she was a very formidable figure.
[Guest]: The Mughals themselves were in awe of her, but because she died a martyr, as it were,
[Guest]: died in the course of battle and not on the battlefield.
[Guest]: Her own men killed her.
[Guest]: It was an internal job.
[Guest]: But she died violently.
[Guest]: There was a certain romance attached to her and romance therefore keeps the story alive.
[Guest]: But a more everyday woman like Khunza Humayun, her mother, who didn't die on the edge of
[Guest]: a sword in a battle, she didn't die violently.
[Guest]: She tried on an everyday basis to take power.
[Guest]: She tried on an everyday basis to hold power and the men resented that to the extent that
[Guest]: they wiped her out.
[Guest]: So what happens in history is if you're a woman and you play some sort of romantic,
[Guest]: poetic role, either as a tragic heroine or some sort of sacrificing mother or whatever,
[Guest]: then you have a place.
[Guest]: Then your story survives in some ways.
[Guest]: If you are of interest to the male imagination.
[Guest]: If you're of interest to the male imagination.
[Guest]: But if you're a Khunza Humayun who tries to take charge of those bastions of male power
[Guest]: and use that and exercise that on an everyday basis, then my God, you're going to be wiped
[Guest]: out of records, wiped out of paintings, wiped out of everything.
[Amit Varma]: So as a male historian, how do you overcome this?
[Amit Varma]: Because on one hand, there is a problem that all your sources are written from this male
[Guest]: gaze.
[Guest]: What can you do differently?
[Guest]: So in my first book, I was lucky in that sense, because it taught me a lot, which is that
[Guest]: my protagonist, my antagonist, they're all women, often the primary material, the letters,
[Guest]: these are all their letters.
[Guest]: It's women writing, it's their perspective and so on.
[Guest]: But with this, with the second book, Rebel Sultans, because as I said, we're going further
[Guest]: back in time, the material becomes a problem.
[Guest]: You can consciously try and resurrect these women.
[Guest]: You can consciously try and tell their stories.
[Guest]: But if the material doesn't exist, you can't invent stuff.
[Guest]: So that is the tragedy in history.
[Guest]: So what I see as the solution is largely more women writing history.
[Guest]: Because although historians are in the task of connecting the dots, as a man or because
[Guest]: most textbooks are written by men, we are taught or trained at some ingrained level
[Guest]: to connect the dots in a certain way, whereas a woman writes history, if more women come
[Guest]: into history, look at the same material, they will bring a different gaze to it, a gaze
[Guest]: that has not so far received as much space as it should.
[Guest]: So I'll name Parvati Sharma, who's now written a book on Jahangir or Ira Mukherjee, who's
[Guest]: written about Mughal women.
[Guest]: And it's fascinating because they bring a completely different perspective to this,
[Guest]: the same material I would have approached in a certain way.
[Guest]: But because they are women, they bring a completely different angle.
[Guest]: And it's an angle that's been missing for too long.
[Guest]: And it needs to be rectified.
[Guest]: A man can do his best to try and see it from that perspective.
[Guest]: But naturally, having more women historians has its own advantages as well.
[Amit Varma]: And on that note, let's get back to your narrative and to our male protagonists.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about how after the Bahmanis fell, how Bijapur and you know, how the different
[Amit Varma]: rebel sultans, how they evolved in different directions, for example, Bijapur almost seems
[Amit Varma]: to sort of use faith as a weapon of real politic, Yusuf Adil Shah declared Bijapur a Shia state,
[Amit Varma]: which was also very interesting, because at that point, there was still the pretense of
[Amit Varma]: the Bahmani Empire going on.
[Amit Varma]: So in a sense, he had two masters nominally, which is a Bahmani king and the Shah of Iran.
[Amit Varma]: And is this in any way analogous to a dilemma that Muslims face right up to the 20th century,
[Amit Varma]: where you are part of whatever nation state you're part of?
[Amit Varma]: But you know, like with the Khilafat movement, you saw a dilemma sort of playing out that
[Guest]: you're also part of the larger Qaum, so to say, which is what, you know, right wing Hindutva
[Guest]: people keep using against Muslims.
[Guest]: What was the great Golwalkar Savarkar argument, which is that, oh, you know, to be truly Hindu
[Guest]: or Indian, you need to have not only your birth here, your home here, but also your
[Guest]: place of worship.
[Guest]: This has to be a motherland and your fatherland, which is not the case for Muslims.
[Guest]: If you're bowing to Mecca, which is in a foreign country, then your loyalties are suspect.
[Guest]: And for Muslims, of course, you know, not acknowledging that global aspect of it is
[Guest]: impossible because, and silly, in fact, it's silly and no, but it's impossible to the idea,
[Guest]: which is that why must you be either or?
[Guest]: The whole point of this country is there's so much diversity, so much language, so many
[Guest]: castes, you can be all of it at once.
[Guest]: You can be, you know, a North Indian, I'm a South Indian, but that doesn't make you
[Guest]: or me less Indian.
[Guest]: I can be at the same time a Malayali.
[Guest]: And this is an example my ex-boss Shashi Tharoor often gives, which is, you can be a good Hindu
[Guest]: and you can be a good Indian.
[Guest]: You can be a good Malayali and you can be a good Indian.
[Guest]: None of these are in contradiction to each other.
[Guest]: It's okay to have multiple layers of identity.
[Guest]: But of course, for the right wing, the fact that Muslims have a non-Indian link as well,
[Guest]: which is an identity that rises above any one given nation state, that becomes a little
[Guest]: bit of a problem.
[Guest]: But as I said, that it depends on how you want to look at it, because I don't think
[Guest]: Indian Muslims are any less Indian because they have a place of worship in Mecca, or
[Guest]: because many of them are descended from people who came from Iran or whatever.
[Guest]: As I said, many, if you come to the South, the oldest Muslim communities have nothing
[Guest]: to do with these later immigrations.
[Amit Varma]: They've been here for thousands of years.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a great hypocrisy inherent in these claims, because these claims are made
[Amit Varma]: by people who are wearing clothing, which have come from outside, from the Middle East.
[Amit Varma]: They're eating food.
[Amit Varma]: I had a great episode with Vikram Doctor recently about the Indianness of Indian food, about
[Amit Varma]: how so much Indian food has sort of originated in various different places and are still
[Amit Varma]: nevertheless inherently completely Indian.
[Guest]: Look at Bombay or Mumbai, where we now are, you know, the Ganesh festival just happened.
[Guest]: You would have seen there were so many marigold flowers that were being used.
[Guest]: Where did the marigold come from?
[Guest]: South America.
[Amit Varma]: It's only a 400, 500 year old flower.
[Amit Varma]: That's the same point Vikram made in the show.
[Guest]: We now use the marigold for all our rituals, but the marigold is not even an Indian flower.
[Guest]: The potato is not Indian.
[Guest]: You know, a lot of these spices that we, the green chillies are not Indian.
[Guest]: You know, South Indians make sambar now with potato and tomato and onion.
[Guest]: These were never there in the old version of sambar.
[Guest]: These are vegetables that came, my grandmother tells me, growing up in the 1930s and 40s,
[Guest]: they never ate potatoes and onions because they never came there.
[Guest]: Once in a while, you'll see it coming from somewhere else in the country, but most of
[Guest]: the time it was never eaten.
[Guest]: It was never, the tapioca, if you go to Kerala now, what we call kappa in mean curry, which
[Guest]: is, you know, tapioca with fish, it's considered like a staple quintessential Malayali dish.
[Guest]: Tapioca came to Kerala in the 1880s.
[Amit Varma]: Have you heard my episode with Doc?
[Amit Varma]: I don't think so because he said all of this.
[Amit Varma]: So let's, I think the episode's gone on for a long time.
[Amit Varma]: So let's, we can kind of rush through this portion of history and sort of, so sum up
[Amit Varma]: for me how this dynamic is playing out, these different rebel sultans after the Bahmani
[Amit Varma]: Empire in the North Deccan.
[Amit Varma]: What's really going on?
[Guest]: What are the dynamics?
[Guest]: Well, as I said, these are military states.
[Guest]: They have no grand agenda, they have no grand, you know, nationalistic principle, nothing.
[Guest]: It's just that one set of elites is in power, somewhere else, another set of elites is in
[Guest]: power.
[Guest]: Lower elites are trying to claim power.
[Guest]: That's what ends up happening.
[Guest]: So the most striking figure is towards the end of the book.
[Guest]: So the book is the subtitle from Khilji to Shivaji.
[Guest]: Shivaji is the one where I end the book because what Shivaji is doing is for 400 years, 500
[Guest]: years, the Deccan's been under Islamic rule.
[Guest]: Now this doesn't mean the Hindus have been displaced.
[Guest]: The best example is this little kingdom called the Garhwal Raj, which was in former princely
[Guest]: state of Hyderabad.
[Guest]: Now initially they were feudatories or vassals of the Kakatiyas.
[Guest]: Then the Kakatiyas are displaced and the Delhi Sultans come.
[Guest]: They start serving the Delhi Sultans.
[Guest]: Delhi Sultans are gone.
[Guest]: Bahmanis come.
[Guest]: They start serving the Bahmani Sultans.
[Guest]: The Bahmanis are gone.
[Guest]: Finally, the Adil Shahs and the Qutub Shahs at various points end up being their overlords.
[Guest]: They sound a lot like the Indian bureaucracy.
[Guest]: Yeah, yes.
[Guest]: That's the point I'm making.
[Guest]: Finally they come under the hands of the Nizam of Hyderabad, who was an agent of the Mughal
[Guest]: Emperor and they survive all the way till 1948.
[Guest]: So something that existed in the 1300s, that same family ruling of the same 1000 square
[Guest]: miles of territory has continued to rule all the way till 1948.
[Guest]: So the top layer may keep changing and shifting and falling and rising, but just beneath that,
[Guest]: there aren't that many changes.
[Guest]: These are all very elite level changes and discussions that are happening.
[Guest]: At the next level, things are pretty much, you know, they're in the hands of the same
[Guest]: family Muslims.
[Guest]: Hindus have not been displaced en masse or anything.
[Guest]: What is interesting with Shivaji is that this Islamicate court culture that evolved in the
[Guest]: Deccan, a very peculiar blend of part North India, part Persian, part Vijayanagar, all
[Guest]: of it existed.
[Guest]: Shivaji now wants to go back to a Sanskritized version of kingship.
[Guest]: So he consciously starts avoiding Persian words and creates the Raja Vewahar Kosha,
[Guest]: which is a Sanskrit dictionary, starts writing letters towards the end of his reign in Sanskrit
[Guest]: to other northern kings because he's trying to construct a new court culture, a new way
[Guest]: of doing politics inspired by Sanskritic Hindu traditions.
[Guest]: So he wants the Rajputs and him and all these Hindu origin people to sort of, you know,
[Guest]: stick to the Sanskritized version of things rather than the Persianized version of things.
[Amit Varma]: And would you say this is similar to what happened in the early 20th century, the late
[Amit Varma]: 19th century, when a lot of these groups tried to take Hindustani and separate Urdu from
[Amit Varma]: Hindi and build some kind of separate Shuddh Hindi?
[Guest]: Yeah, that begins in the 19th century, really, where you have this ultra Sanskritized Hindi
[Guest]: being born and this ultra Persianized Urdu being crafted as a separate thing.
[Guest]: Whereas in reality, they're children of the same mother and that mother was much more
[Guest]: mixed up than either will admit, but this quest for purity.
[Guest]: So that is largely a result of the colonial intervention as well, that's a later phenomenon.
[Guest]: What's interesting in Shivaji's time, however, is that simultaneously with him in Golconda,
[Guest]: we have two Brahmin ministers of the Qutub Shah called Madana and Akana and they're brothers.
[Guest]: And one of them refers, talks to a Dutch merchant and he says, oh, look, all these Persians
[Guest]: coming here, they make their money and their fortunes and they go back because those are
[Guest]: their fatherlands.
[Guest]: We have only this as our land.
[Guest]: So we are much better in terms of we should be running this place properly.
[Guest]: It's interesting because this is almost a Golwalkar-esque, Savarkar-esque argument from
[Guest]: the 20th century, but we're hearing it in the late 17th century.
[Guest]: So what it indicates is that at the elite level, there was some beginning of an identity
[Guest]: that was in common, saying that something was missing.
[Guest]: There was a sense of loss.
[Amit Varma]: And these intellectual strains, therefore, existed from before, it's not like Golwalkar
[Guest]: and Savarkar sort of, it began with them.
[Guest]: They took it to a completely different level, which is by making more mass.
[Guest]: Why is this mass now?
[Guest]: Because we've now bought into this idea that the Sanskritic version of Hinduism is the
[Guest]: version of Hinduism, which is not true.
[Guest]: What happened to lower caste versions of Hinduism?
[Guest]: What happened to tribal versions of Hinduism?
[Guest]: You know, there are surveys in South India from 1915, as late as 1915, talking about
[Guest]: how 80% people in South India did not subscribe to Brahminical gods.
[Guest]: They had their local tree gods and local goddess of smallpox and things like that.
[Guest]: But as education came in, they started Brahminicizing or Sanskritizing and giving up their ancient
[Guest]: gods and becoming worshippers of Shiva, Parvati, Vishnu.
[Guest]: So this happens simultaneously with that, where you have this mass reinforcement of
[Guest]: the idea that the faith of the Brahmins is the legitimate form of Hinduism.
[Guest]: Whereas in the earlier phase, what you see is this sense of, I think, what happened is
[Guest]: that earlier, if you were under Hindu kingdom or a Hindu king, your patronage was limited
[Guest]: to these elite groups.
[Guest]: With the Muslims, there was competition.
[Guest]: There were these Persians, there were these Africans.
[Guest]: So you weren't quite the top of the chain, as it were.
[Guest]: So that seems to have created a little bit of elite resentment, which is what you see
[Guest]: in the 17th century.
[Guest]: And Shivaji was definitely, therefore, when he says he's building a Hindavi Swaraj, he
[Guest]: does therefore play up the idea of that.
[Guest]: But it wasn't something for all Hindus against all Muslims.
[Guest]: He employed Muslims.
[Guest]: He had Qazis in, you know, the famous episode where Afzal Khan is sent to murder Shivaji.
[Guest]: Now, if you look at it, Afzal Khan versus Shivaji, Muslim versus Hindu.
[Guest]: But look at the people coming with Afzal Khan, Ghorpade.
[Guest]: So Maharashtrian surnames, they're Maratha surnames.
[Guest]: On Shivaji's side, Siddhi Ibrahim, it's a Muslim.
[Guest]: Shivaji had plenty of Muslims.
[Guest]: He had plenty of Islamic influences in his court as well.
[Guest]: But he looked at power from a Sanskritic position.
[Guest]: And that seems to have begun something.
[Guest]: And simultaneously, you have similar trends in Golconda, which means that at that particular
[Guest]: juncture, when the Sultanate is starting to collapse, when the Mughals are coming in violently
[Guest]: from the north, there is this germination of a new sense of elite identity.
[Guest]: I will not say it's a Hindu identity because there was no one broad Hindu community.
[Guest]: For a Brahmin, a Dalit was as alien as a Muslim.
[Guest]: There was no commonality between them.
[Guest]: One could argue it's still the same today.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: I mean, I don't think they see each other as part of the same ecosystem or whatever.
[Guest]: So in that sense, there was something that was being born then.
[Guest]: So I wouldn't agree with many people who say that, oh, you know, communalism is entirely
[Guest]: a colonial invention.
[Guest]: No, at the elite level, there seems to have been some, you know, some sort of minor flavor
[Guest]: that seems to have been coming in at this particular time, which later assumed bigger
[Amit Varma]: proportions in the colonial period.
[Amit Varma]: Now, reading your book and listening to you now, on one hand, it seems as if, if you look
[Amit Varma]: below the top layer, if you look below the Sultans and the people in charge, what you
[Amit Varma]: really have are these vast, really solid waves of history moving, you know, like the same
[Amit Varma]: bureaucracy serving different empires for hundreds of years, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And they are as they are.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, you also see these powerful individuals like maybe Alauddin Khilji or
[Amit Varma]: like Shivaji later, who have a huge impact on history just as individuals.
[Amit Varma]: So what do you think of Thomas Carlyle's great man of history kind of the great man theory?
[Guest]: See, I think they become great men largely in hindsight, in the sense that we pick and
[Guest]: choose who we want to highlight, who we want to project more at the cost of whom.
[Guest]: So as I said, you know, Shivaji dominates the Deccan landscape.
[Guest]: The Deccan is often reduced to Mughals versus Shivaji, if you're lucky, otherwise, it's
[Guest]: only Shivaji, especially in Maharashtra, it's only Shivaji.
[Guest]: He deserves his place in history.
[Guest]: He's a very charismatic, interesting figure.
[Guest]: But as I said, better historians have done good books on him.
[Guest]: What interested me was, why only him?
[Guest]: There are so many people before him.
[Guest]: Why not Ibrahim Adil Shah II with his Rudrakshan Saraswati love?
[Guest]: Why not Malik Ambar, the African who saved the Deccan for at least two generations from
[Guest]: Mughal conquest?
[Guest]: You know, these are people who also made history, but because they have no political constituency
[Guest]: now, they've been forgotten.
[Guest]: So the great men of history are also a reflection of our own anxieties, our own insecurities,
[Guest]: our own sense of what we want to draw from history, rather than what actually happened
[Guest]: in history.
[Guest]: Which is why more and more people, at least with my first book and my second book, the
[Guest]: idea is to pull these people or pull these stories out of the footnotes and give them
[Guest]: the broad audience that they deserve.
[Guest]: Because they don't deserve to merely be a footnote in a larger story of somebody else.
[Guest]: They were actually independent actors in their own right, in their own time, they were the
[Guest]: main actors and people who made history.
[Guest]: We shouldn't put them into the shadow of any one great man or great woman as such.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you mentioned Ibrahim Adil Shah II, Ibrahim Adil Shah I died in a very interesting
[Amit Varma]: way, which you described, but basically he fell ill.
[Amit Varma]: And every physician who tried to cure him when they couldn't take his pain away, he
[Guest]: had them trampled by mad elephants, which then led to a mass exodus of all physicians
[Amit Varma]: from his capital.
[Amit Varma]: He had no one to treat him and he died, which is a classic mistaking causation for correlation,
[Amit Varma]: something modern leaders tend to do today as well.
[Amit Varma]: Listen, I've taken a tremendous amount of your time and I would actually have loved
[Amit Varma]: to go through the whole narrative all the way to Shivaji and beyond.
[Amit Varma]: All I can do is urge readers to read your amazing book because there is a lot more to
[Amit Varma]: the Deccan than just Shivaji or the Mughals and so on.
[Amit Varma]: On that note, Manu, thanks so much for appearing on The Seed and The Unseen today.
[Guest]: Thank you for having me.
[Amit Varma]: I had a great time here.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do hop over either to Amazon or to the Juggernaut
[Amit Varma]: app and buy Rebel Sultans by Manu Pillay.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Manu on Twitter at Unampillai, U-N-A-M-P-I-L-L-A-I.
[Amit Varma]: And you can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen on seenunseen.in or thinkpragati.com.
[Unknown]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: Hi my name is Abbas, I'm a producer at IBM and I, along with other staff members of IBM,
[Unknown]: we do this show called IBM Likes, where we give recommendations of books, movies, music,
[Unknown]: TV shows that we've seen, we've even recommended video games and YouTube channels.
[Unknown]: And we are soon reaching our 100th episode, we are on episode 99 right now.
[Unknown]: And on the 100th episode, we'd love to hear from you.
[Unknown]: So send us your messages, voice notes, goodwill, all of it on shows at IndusVox.com.
[Unknown]: And we will read out your messages on the 100th episode of IBM Likes, tell us about
[Unknown]: the recommendations we've given you that you've enjoyed, tell us about the episodes that you
[Unknown]: remember, tell us about the conversations that you've enjoyed, and we will read all
[Unknown]: of it out on the 100th episode.
[Unknown]: Send your messages on shows at IndusVox.com and do tune in to the 100th episode of IBM
[Unknown]: Likes, out next week.
[Unknown]: And since then, he'd never worn a cap or a hat, not even to bachao from the thandi.
[Unknown]: But from Monday, 26th February, Mohan Joshi had to wear a topi all the time.
[Unknown]: Why?
[Unknown]: Because if he didn't, everyone around him knew exactly wo kya soch raha tha.
[Unknown]: They knew that he was wondering how the girl in the yellow churidar would look bina kapde
[Unknown]: ke.
[Unknown]: They knew when he was calling the boss a sadela tamatar.
[Unknown]: They knew everything.
[Unknown]: Par yeh sab hua kaise?
[Unknown]: Are bhai, yeh hi toh story hai, aur yeh story aap hi ne mujhe diya, by giving me the starting
[Unknown]: word.
[Unknown]: Yeh hi toh hai, the Croc's Tales, words aapke, kahani aapke liye.
[Unknown]: Catch the stories on Monday and Thursday on the IBM website, app, and anywhere you get
[Unknown]: your podcasts from.
[Unknown]: See you soon!